Parliament, Wednesday, 21 November 2018 –  The Portfolio Committee on Labour today embarked on a walkabout at the Cape Town Labour Centre to check, among other things, the general operation of the centre and the challenges it faces. The Chairperson of the committee Mr Lemias Mashile said the walkabout at the centre was necessitated by, among other things, that the committee adopts budget allocations that go to government departments of which the Cape Town Labour Centre is the beneficiary and the fact that the committee has an oversight responsibility on the Department of Labour. “We must as a committee see the value which the public money adds at public institutions such as this one” said Mr Mashile. Briefing the committee on the work of the centre and challenges it experiences, the Deputy Director Labour Centre Operations, Mr Bhele Mzinyathi mentioned the problem of electricity and the decaying water infrastructure at the Department of Public Works building where the centre operates. He said another problem was the fact that when the centre fumigates the two floors it occupies in the building as it shares the building with the South African Police Services (SAPS), the cockroaches from other floors that are occupied by SAPS fly to their floors. Mr Mashile advised the centre management for cooperation with SAPS management to ensure that the challenges that face the building are dealt with. He said because the building is owned by the government and maintained by the Department of Public Works, managers must ensure that the challenges reach the attention of the Department of Public Works’s senior management. The committee was happy with the general state of the operation of the centre especially its performance on service delivery to the people. The committee also heard that there is going to be an employment youth centre which will be finalised in March 2019. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, MR LEMIAS MASHILE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Zizipho Klaas
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 280 1818
	E-mail: zklaas@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more