Parliament, Thursday, 1 November 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs will next Tuesday (6 November 2018) invite the Minister of Home Affairs Mr Malusi Gigaba to clarify the department's view on the granting of permission for the operation of a private terminal at OR Tambo International Airport. This follows the Public Protector's Report released yesterday that the Minister lied under oath and today's Constitutional Court ruling dismissing the Minister's leave to appeal the lower courts ruling on the matter. On Tuesday (30 October 2018), the committee met the owners of Fireblade and they presented their side of the story and alleged that the Minister lied. The committee had on various occasions had engagements with the department on the very matter as part of its oversight role over the department. The committee's preoccupation is that the operation of a private terminal is done with a clear agreement that delineates roles and responsibilities and protects taxpayers monies. "The Public Protector's findings released yesterday and the Constitutional Court ruling puts into question the admissibility of information that the department has previously put before the committee. The meeting next week is to ascertain the department's view on the matter now," said Mr Hlomani Chauke, the Chairperson of the Committee. It is only fair that the committee affords the department and the Minister an opportunity to clarify the matter so that the committee concludes its oversight over the matter. The findings of the Public Protector and the Constitutional Court ruling point to a total disregard for the taxpayers resources as large sums of money were spent on frivolous litigation on the matter. The committee has to apply its mind on what then needs to happen in recouping the money spent on litigation. The committee will; if requested; also present information to the Ethics Committee where the Public Protector report was referred to. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, MR HLOMANI CHAUKE For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mr Malatswa Molepo
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed.Read more