Parliament, Friday, 02 November 2018 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman, has hailed the re-establishment and re-launch of the anti-gang unit aimed at defeating gang violence. The Chairperson will participate at the launch of the unit in Hanover Park, in the Western Cape, today. The launch of the anti-gang unit brings to life recommendations made by the National Development Plan, which emphasised the centrality of specialised units in effectively fighting crime and stopping the illicit economy that enables these crimes. “The committee has on a number of occasions during fifth Parliament pushed for the re-establishment of these specialised units, which should be specially trained to deal effectively with changing environments in gang-infested areas. The committee is of the view that the unit will play a central role in weakening the capacity of gangs to operate and put a halt to activities, such as the production and sale of drugs, while reducing illegal firearms and the high incidence of gang-related murders,” Mr Beukman said. While the committee welcomes the launch of this unit, it has emphasised that units such as this need to be capacitated effectively and efficiently to deliver on its mandate. This includes human capacity, information technology assets and any other resource they need to function effectively. A key pillar for success will be the capacity to gather information, which requires cooperation with intelligence agencies. Also, communities must play a leading role by furnishing the unit and the police in general with information that will ensure its effective operation. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more