Parliament, Friday, 02 November 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Women in the Presidency was briefed on Tuesday by the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities (CRL Rights Commission) on the commercialisation of religion and the exploitation of people’s belief systems. During its deliberations with the chairperson of the CRL Rights Commission, Ms Thoko Mkwanazi-Xaluva, the committee heard of the lack of government support for Ms Cheryl Zondi and other witnesses in the ongoing trial of rape accused Pastor Timothy Omotoso. Ms Mkhwanazi-Xaluva said government has not assisted with protecting the young women. She said Ms Zondi has been hailed as a strong woman and a fighter. However, it is important that she and the other women who are still to testify should receive all the support they need. Members of the committee expressed concern, saying it is unacceptable that survivors of domestic abuse and sexual violence do not receive proper support and protection. Members of the committee said government needs to ensure security for the women and provide counselling services in this difficult time. “They are the most vulnerable at this point in time and the system cannot fail these young women”, said the Chairperson of the committee, Ms Thandi Memela. Ms Mkhwanazi-Xaluva said she had scheduled a meeting on the matter with the Minister of Justice this week. The committee will work with the Department of Social Development to ensure that it provides social workers to assist the affected families. Ms Memela said Parliament needs to work jointly with other committees to provide support to the women. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WOMEN IN THE PRESIDENCY, MS THANDI MEMELA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more