Parliament, Wednesday, 7 November 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services today received a briefing on the extradition treaty and mutual legal assistance on criminal matters treaty between South Africa and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). Committee Chairperson, Ms Madipoane Refiloe Moremadi Mothapo, said the committee adopted both treaties unanimously. The committee heard that the treaty on extradition came about after the two countries became deeply concerned about the magnitude of a rising trend in acts of international terrorism and organised crime. This treaty is meant to strengthen and reinforce cooperation between the two countries in combating crime. The committee further heard that the process of the treaties started in 2010 and was signed on 25 September 2018. Committee members wanted to know if the extradition treaty will be applied retrospectively with specific reference to the Gupta-family. The committee was assured that all crimes committed prior to signing of the treaties will also be covered. The committee was told that treaties are a two-way process and delays can take place on either side. In relation to the treaty on mutual legal assistance in criminal matters, the committee heard it was guided by the relations between the two countries and recognising the need to facilitate the widest measures of mutual legal assistance in criminal matters. The committee heard the Department of Justice received seven or eight requests for mutual legal assistance to other countries from the Department of International Relations and Cooperation in criminal matters regarding investigations into state capture. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, MS MADIPOANE REFILOE MOREMADI MOTHAPO. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more