Parliament, Wednesday, 14 November 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Police is of the view that the South African Police Service (Saps) must focus on strengthening leadership at rural police stations, if the Rural Safety Strategy is to be effective. The committee today received presentations from various stakeholders, with the aim of finding workable solutions to increasing crime in rural areas. The overarching principle in fighting crime should be anchored on strong leadership, able to develop and implement an effective strategy, coupled with monitoring and evaluation tools to assess the impact. Also, the strengthening of reservists as force multipliers, especially in rural areas, can be used to an effective tool to fight crime in these communities. The committee highlighted the lack of resources that would enable rural police stations to fight crime. “It is untenable that some of the rural police stations have only one to two cars to service an extensive area. Furthermore, the lack of appropriate technology, such as quad bikes, specialised information technology tools, helicopters and 4x4 vehicles is concerning, as this hampers the effective implementation of the Rural Safety Strategy,” said Mr Francois Beukman, the Chairperson of the portfolio committee. The committee also called for the consolidation of resources between stakeholders and Saps to effectively fight crime. In relations to the illicit economy, including stock theft, the committee highlighted the need for the Justice, Crime Prevention and Security cluster to develop guidelines to ensure criminals are prosecuted effectively. Besides these concerns, the committee has emphasised the need for a broad, multi-sectoral approach to dealing with crime in rural areas. Jobs-intensive economic growth is central to reducing unemployment and capacitating young people, enabling them to meaningfully participate in economic activity. “When people are gainfully employed they will in all likelihood not be inclined to commit crime. Furthermore, the departments of Basic Education and Higher Education must play a leading role in rolling out their programmes in rural areas to ensure that the rural population also benefits. The committee also called for the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform to strengthen its role in ensuring improved conditions of service for farm workers and labours, who continue to be subjected to horrendous treatment. Another major contributing factor to crime in these areas is substance abuse, which must be addressed urgently. The Department of Social Development must strengthen its programmes and work with stakeholders within the rural community, to effectively deal with this ever-increasing problem. But above all, the Saps must play a leading role in the fight against crime in rural areas, as envisioned by the National Development Plan. In some areas currently, stakeholders are left to fend for themselves, which should not be the case. Also, the committee emphasised the need for the re-establishment of specialised units to deal with the rising scourge of crime, including rural crime. Furthermore, the intelligence services must play a leading role in gathering information that will lead to prevention of crimes. The committee welcomes the commitment by stakeholders, such as Agri-SA, the Congress of South African Trade Unions and the African Farmers’ Association of South Africa, to work with Saps to fight crime. The committee urged all stakeholders to collaboratively and urgently develop a comprehensive Rural Safety Strategy and to present it before the committee within a month. The committee has emphasised that planning represents only half of the work that must be done. Effective implementation must be strengthened. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa.Read more