The programme of constructing skills centres and training colleges is challenged by community disruptions, the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training heard on Wednesday. The Director-General at the Department of Higher Education and Training, Mr Gwebs Qonde, told the committee that three colleges that had been affected are Giyani, Balfour and Aliwal North. “Some of these disruptions are by interest groups at the point of handing over sites. There will be protests for employment or which companies are appointed, and in some instances councillors get involved in advancing their preferred persons and how tenders should be allocated,” Mr Qonde said. He said the projects are always stopped or delayed as a result. In Balfour, a company went into liquidation just after two months after it had been awarded the contract. The department had since engaged the National Treasury for procuring further and that National Treasury had since agreed on the processes that need to be put in place. In Giyani, the main contractor in the joint venture pulled out and the small contractors cannot be allowed to continue, as awarding was based on grading. Mr Qonde revealed that construction began yesterday in Aliwal North following disruptions, and that arrests were effected. “These are challenges which are beyond us, but we work hard to resolve them.” The department came to present its first and second quarter expenditure to the committee. Members sought clarity on why it appeared easy for the department to achieve all its targets. Committee member, Ms Julia Killian, said the department needed to do a relook at the most critical intervention per branch that will make a significant difference. “The committee is concerned that you compile a report, then tick a box. The important thing to measure is what has changed, other than that you have ticked a box,” Ms Killian said. Member also sought clarity on management of Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) colleges and Community Education and Training (CET) colleges that seemed to be having a challenge in issuing certificates, and workshops that are conducted with a view to improve training of lecturers. Mr Qonde said it was crucial for the department to look at how it sets the targets. “We need to reflect on this as a department, we are doing work and we have to account for our operations.” By Sibongile Maputi 21 November 2018 Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns.Read more