Parliament, Wednesday, 14 November 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Labour was briefed today at Parliament by a Representative of Trainers on the working and living conditions of the grooms in the horse racing industry and on blitz inspections conducted by the Department of Labour in the horse racing industry, nationwide. The committee observed, among other things, from the briefing that the horse racing industry is regulated by several departments, including the Department of Labour and the Department of Trade and Industry. Grooms are employed by trainers, and trainers lease training premises from Phumelela Gaming and Leisure Ltd (Phumelela). Phumelela is in charge of hostels where grooms live and trainers and grooms are not organised into recognised structures for negotiation purposes. Based on these observations, the committee recommended that the trainers should organise themselves into an association of employers and that the grooms should organise themselves into a trade union. The committee was informed by the department that a trade union for grooms has since been registered under the name, South African Horsing Workers Union (SAHWU). The committee also heard that the membership of the union currently stands at 7 000. The committee requested the Department of Labour to assist trainers and Phumelela, to clarify their roles as joint employers of the grooms. The department was also requested to conduct regular advocacy campaigns to make grooms and trainers aware of their rights and responsibilities. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, MR LEMIAS MASHILE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mava Lukani (Mr) 
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 503 1840
	E-mail: mlukani@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more