The prevalence of crime in Gauteng province dominated the first day of discussions by community members during public hearings held by the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) at the Alberton Civic Centre as part of the Taking Parliament to the People programme currently underway in Gauteng. The programme’s aim is to bring together all three spheres of government – and as a means of strengthening accountability and oversight. Speaker after speaker lamented the poor services they are receiving from the South African Police Service across the province. Mr Steve Mnisi from Mamelodi in the City of Tshwane Metropolitan area lamented the lack of assistance from South African Police Service (SAPS). “We are all here as the community to assist the police but the police are not utilising the information received from the people. Tell me Deputy Minister, what is so difficult for the police to arrest all the drug lords? If they can tell us their problem maybe we can help,” Mr Mnisi highlighted. In relation to the services by the department of Home Affairs, Mr Mnisi alleged that the officials gave preferences to foreign nationals because they could afford to pay bribes. This, according to him, was the reason why corruption was so prevalent in the department. Ms Lilian Nkomo from Ekurhuleni said she was hopeful that the Taking Parliament to the People programme will provide them with a platform to get answers because they have complained for a long time. Ms Mnisi said the fight against crime is undercut by the very officers of the law that are meant to enforce it (the law). “Police officers work with criminals and until this is stopped, the fight against crime will not be successful. I think it is about time that government takes matters seriously and ensure that those police officers who work with criminals are prosecuted and send to jail,” Ms Mnisi emphasised. She further alleged that in her area many dockets get lost and cases never get to be adjudicated by the courts. “You go to court and you hear that the case has been withdrawn but as the complainant you don’t know anything about it. I hope that something should be done to improve the communications between SAPS and the complainants,” Ms Mnisi said. Like many participants at the hearings, Ms Mnisi complained about the lack of a nearby police station which will enable them to report matters quickly. “In Mayfield we have to walk kilometres to get to the nearest police station. It’s even worse that we have to walk through a forest area which is dangerous, especially for females. We are requesting that a police station is brought closer to the people to enable people to report cases,” Ms Mnisi said. Responding to challenges raised, the Deputy Minister of Police Mr Bongani Mkongi agreed with the overall sentiment that South Africa is under siege in terms of crime and criminality. “Our people don’t feel safe. What is fundamental for us politicians is to close the gaps that have been identified by our people that make criminals to flourish in our country. One of the issues that our people have raised, is the influx of illegal immigrants into our country and as government we must respond to those concerns as this speaks to the territorial integrity of the republic,” the Deputy Minister emphasised. Deputy Minister Mkongi called for a collaborative effort between communities and the police to aid the fight against crime. “Please assist the police and stop buying stolen goods because the illicit economy is funded by you, the community members. You know very well that this gentleman doesn’t own a furniture shop but you continue to buy a plasma television from him. The vicious cycle of crime is being fed by you,” Mr Mkongi said. The Deputy Minister also assured the community that they are doing work to rid the service of corrupt police officers. Today the programme will focus on issues of health, human settlements, water and sanitation. By Malatswa Molepo
	20 November 2018 The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion.Read more