Parliament, Wednesday, 21 November 2018 – The Standing Committee on the Auditor General has urged the Office of the Auditor-General to move with speed towards completing the process of developing regulations to give effect to the Public Audit Amendment Bill. The committee raised this following the announcement by the Presidency that the President has signed into law the Public Audit Amendment Bill. “The committee has for a while now advocated for strengthened consequence management in the public service. It is high time that officials are held liable for irregularities they commit. With this new law, we are hopeful that accounting officers and officials will be held accountable for the wrongs that they do,” said Ms Nthabiseng Khunou, the Chairperson of the committee. This bill is a step in the right direction in ensuring that taxpayer’s monies are spend diligently with due care and regard. The committee remains of the view that good governance and accountability are strong pillars in ensuring effective service delivery. The committee welcomes the new bill, which will, among other things, empower the Auditor-General to refer suspected material irregularities arising from an audit to a relevant public body for investigation; to provide for the Auditor-General to issue a certificate of debt where an accounting officer or accounting authority failed to recover losses from a responsible person; and to instruct the relevant executive authority to collect the debt. The committee has always emphasised the need to empower institutions supporting democracy to create a platform for good governance within government departments and state-owned entities. The committee also welcomes developments that anyone accused of financial irregularities will be liable, irrespective of resignation or redeployment. The committee has committed itself to working with the Office of the Auditor-General to finalise the regulations. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL, MS NTHABISENG KHUNOU For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more