Parliament, Tuesday, 19 June 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform differs with the assertion made by some participants that public hearings on the Restitution of Land Rights Amendment Bill are a waste of time in the context of the impending Constitutional Review Committee’s consideration of amending Section 25 of the Constitution. The portfolio committee asserts that the two processes are distinct and can proceed as envisioned. “It must be stated clearly that the public hearings on the Restitution of Land Rights Amendment Bill were initiated following a Constitutional Court ruling instructing Parliament to enact an Act within 24 months. As a result of the ruling, the committee through the public hearings, is implementing a decision of the highest court in the land,” said the Chairperson of the portfolio committee, Ms Phumuzile Ngwenya-Mabila. Furthermore, the Chairperson highlighted that the Constitutional Court did not find the 2014 Restitution of Land Rights Amendment Bill unconstitutional, but merely called for the strengthening of public participation. “It should be stated that restitution remains an integral pillar of land reform,” Ms Ngwenya-Mabila emphasised. She further emphasised that the issue of land is currently top of the public agenda and must be taken seriously. Meanwhile, the portfolio committee has decried the lack of communication between the Commission on Restitution of Land Rights and land claimants. It is unfortunate that claimants have not been informed about progress relating to their claims. “It is for this reason that we urge the commission to strengthen communication and to have monitoring systems that will inform the public about progress with their claims. This will limit anxiety among claimants,” Ms Ngwenya-Mabila said. The committee also reiterated that land grabs are illegal. “The committee continues to dissuade members of the community from participating in such acts,” Ms Ngwenya-Mabila cautioned. Regarding the Thohoyandou hearings, the committee welcomed the varied input made by the people, with some supporting and others rejecting the Bill. The high quality of inputs made will strengthen the Bill and ensure it serves the purpose the legislation is intended to achieve. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM, MS PHUMUZILE NGWENYA-MABILA For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more