Parliament, Thursday, 28 June 2018 – A delegation of the Joint Constitutional Review Committee today held its second hearing for the Northern Cape in Upington on the possible review of section 25 of the Constitution to make expropriation of land without compensation possible. The Co-Chairperson of the committee, Mr Lewis Nzimande, applauded the orderly crowd that gathered since early morning to make their voices heard on the matter. The committee is holding public hearings in the province for the week on a possible review of section 25 of the Constitution and other clauses, to make it possible for the state to expropriate land in the public interest without compensation, and propose constitutional amendments where necessary. “The public has been extremely patient and orderly. When the venue was full, they patiently queued outside until they could be accommodated inside to have a say, whilst the proceedings were audible outside to them. We are also pleased that the majority of inputs were clear on whether they support or are against the amendment of the Constitution. “This shows that the public is interested in the matter and has an interest in making sure Parliament attends to it. The public has also been clear in substantiating their arguments. The great numbers we have seen at the hearings so far are an indication of the importance of land and how it can contribute to the economic well-being of previously disadvantaged people.” The committee heard that unemployment, especially when it comes to the youth, will be addressed should land be given back to the people. Some felt that this process is just another way for government to get its hands on more land. Some submitters claim the amendment of section 25 does not only speak to land but also to property. They felt title deeds should rather have been addressed instead. The hearings for this delegation in the Northern Cape will continue on Friday in Kuruman. Members of the media intending to attend the hearings should please send their details (name, media house and contact details) to razzakani@parliament.gov.za. Please find the link for the updated programme for the public hearings
	https://tinyurl.com/yb9yvalx. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CO-CHAIRPERSON OF THE JOINT CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE, MR VINCENT SMITH AND MR LEWIS NZIMANDE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)Tel: 021 403 8437Cell: 081 703 9542E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs.Read more