The Select Committee on Economic and Business Development continued on Tuesday with public hearings on the National Minimum Wage Bill and related pieces of legislation. The committee received an oral input from the Free Market Foundation (FMF). FMF’s Mr Temba Nolutshungu told the committee that the organisation was opposed to the National Minimum Wage, as it ignored the masses of unemployed people. “We are confronted with serious challenges in the country, 45% of economic active citizens are not employed in the country, and that has serious socio-economic implications,” Mr Nolutshungu said. He said the FMF had carefully considered the four Bills, and none addresses the question of the unemployed people. “What about the unemployed; the country has more than 10 million unemployed people and this is worrying, and so much time is being devoted to low-income employees. This will be a barrier to the unemployed who try to access the job market. We are making it illegal for employers to employ someone for less than R20 an hour,” he said. Members sought clarity on whether the FMF has alternative proposals other than what the National Minimum Wage proposes. Committee member, Mr Vusi Magwebu, asked whether the FMF was opposed to the National Minimum Wage, or how it will be implemented. He pointed out that South Africa was a signatory to the International Labour Organisation’s [Convention No 131] which endorses the National Minimum Wage. “This should be welcomed as a significant move but perhaps we should look at the how part of it. The National Minimum Wage is an elephant in the room that we must embrace as a country,” Mr Magwebu said. Committee member, Ms Lungelwa Zwane, said it was important that entities look at the realities of the economy and the predicament of rising standards of living. “Petrol has gone up a few weeks ago, once the petrol price rises the price of everything rises.” She said the government was sympathetic to those who were unemployment hence all the interventions that are being undertaken through various programmes of government and entities. Committee chairperson, Mr Mandla Rayi said the national minimum wage was aimed at addressing structural challenges in the economy. “This is intended to address issues of poverty and exploitation of those who are economically active.” He sought clarity on what proposals FMF had regarding highest income earners, and whether the organisation has ever undertaken a study on minimum standards of living. The National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (Numsa) and other organisations like the University of Cape Town’s Labour and Enterprise Policy Research Group (LEP) will make inputs later in the day. By Sibongile Maputi
	26 June 2018 Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more