The residents of Greater Taung in North West have raised serious doubts about the ability of the Commission of Restitution of Land Rights to handle the expected surge in claims if the second phase of land claims is reopened. Despite these doubts, however, a majority of participants emphasised the need to reopen the claims process nonetheless. These sentiments were made during public hearings on the Restitution of Land Rights Amendment Bill hosted by the Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform at the Greater Taung Town Hall in North West. The amendment Bill seeks to among other things reopen a second phase of land claims for restitution, as many people have highlighted that they did not claim during the first phase. Member of the portfolio committee, Mr Sam Matiase, informed participants that the committee is also concerned about the lack of research capacity within the commission, but he assured the people that this can be rectified. “We have continuously engaged with the Department of Rural Development to strengthen their internal capacity to deal with this challenge and ensure that it is able to deliver on its mandate,” Mr Matiase said. Earlier, an agitated community member Ms Baby Makgakedisa accused the committee of lying to participants, asserting that there is no need for the amendments. “Statistics are clear that there is a huge backlog to settle claims for the initial phase. At the current rate it might take up to 35 years to settle the backlog of claims,” Ms Makgakedisa emphasised. For another community member, Mr Gaopalelwe Lekoata, the commission will struggle to settle the potential huge number of claims, based on its failure to settle the 80 000 claims lodged by the 1998 deadline. He was also concerned by the conundrum posed by divergent interests among those claiming land versus those who would prefer monetary compensation. “What happens in this instance, because we have diverse interests?” he enquired. The backlog in settling claims was of deep concern for another community member, Mr David Seane. “We claimed our land in 1998. There were many promises made that we will eventually get our land back, but nothing has materialised thus far. We are not even able to visit our forefather’s graves, because the farm has changed hands so much,” Mr Seane decried. But for Mr Jerry Akkers, the amendments came at an opportune time and will enable the people to claim what is rightfully theirs. He emphasised that the proposed five-year window period might be too short for everyone to submit their claims. “I propose that the window be increased to 10 years to enable everyone to lodge their claim,” Mr Akkers said. The committee will also engage the residents of Klerksdorp in the North West in efforts to widen consultation and strengthen the Bill, as part of the extensive nationwide public hearings. Malatswa Molepo
	26 June 2018 Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more