Parliament, Wednesday, 06 June 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services today expressed its disappointment at Public Protector Adv Busisiwe Mkhwebane’s non-appearance at its meeting today. The committee resolved to call her to an urgent meeting next week. The committee was set to be briefed by Adv Mkhwebane on the Public Protector Rules and Policy on the appointment of a Special Advisor to the Executive Authority. The committee was also due to discuss the request by the Speaker of the National Assembly for an inquiry into the Adv Mkhwebane’s fitness or otherwise of to hold office. Committee Chairperson Dr Mathole Motshekga informed the meeting that the committee received correspondence after close of business yesterday from the Public Protector, indicating that she is unable to attend today’s meeting due to a family emergency. She requested the meeting to be rescheduled for 25 June or 7 July 2018. “No further details were provided. During the normal course of our work, documents in preparation of the meeting, as well as a letter detailing the delegation that will be present, is sent in advance. This was not the case in this instance and the committee has received nothing from that office. The committee will thus write to the Public Protector for a full explanation on these matters,” Dr Motshekga explained. The committee furthermore questioned why the Deputy Public Protector, Adv Kevin Malunga, was not available to take over responsibilities at the meeting. “It is not the first time the matter of the Deputy Public Protector and his delegated responsibilities has arisen. We will enquire as to why he was not able to lead a delegation for this meeting. An office is not run by one head. The committee believes in the principle of collective responsibility. The proposed dates do not suit the committee, as the majority of the committee members also serve on the Constitutional Review Committee, which will be holding public hearings during that time and Parliament will have gone into recess by then,” Dr Motshekga explained. Regarding the request to institute an inquiry on the Public Protector’s fitness or otherwise to hold office, the committee resolved to hold this decision in abeyance until it met with the Public Protector to discuss the complaints, made by an opposition party in Parliament, as well as court judgements that raise questions about the competency of the office of the Public Protector. The committee resolved to reschedule it meeting with the Public Protector to Wednesday, 13 June 2018 to address all matters with her. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, DR MATHOLE MOTSHEKGA For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more