Parliament, Wednesday, 15 August 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries today visited three projects in Welkom, Odendaalrus and Parys in the Free State. The committee observed that not all farms are running smoothly, due to the recent drought where farmers have suffered huge livestock and cash-crop losses. The planting season has been delayed and farmers informed the committee that drought relief assistance from the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF) should have come in sooner. At Zeebruggie Farm, the committee was pleased to see that the farmer, a woman, has managed to maintain the farm despite her lease expiring. This farm was acquired from the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform through the Proactive Land Acquisition Strategy. Without a lease or title deed, farmers find it difficult to approach financial institution for loans. Other challenges she experiences are not having a tractor, trailer or sufficient irrigation, and the assets bought from the department do not work. The committee calls on the DAFF to work with the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform to ensure that new leases are put in place timeously. At Tsokolibane Trust, farmer Mr Tsokolibane who owns the farm with 10 other family members informed the committee that at the time of the handover of the farm there was an agreement with a mining company to supply drinking water to the farm. The mining company has since reneged on this agreement, and he has suffered livestock and crop losses, as the underground water has been contaminated by the mining company. The committee Chairperson, Ms Rosina Semenya, directed the DAFF and the municipality to ensure that water is supplied to the farm. The department was instrumental in assisting Mr Tsokolibane with resources such as Bonsmara cattle, and production inputs. The last visit was to Meadows Farm, which is owned and managed by a mother and her three sons. Here the community members came together to pool their resources to acquire the farm in 2015, so the farm is not yet 3 years old. Nonetheless, and the committee members were impressed with the management and maintenance of the farm. The farm received assistance from the DAFF in 2016/2017 and 2017/2018, and has proven that given the resources and support, farmers can be successful and contribute to South Africa’s food security. The programme for tomorrow, Thursday, 16 August 2018, is as follows:  ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES, MS ROSINA MACHWENE SEMENYA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly.Read more