The President of South African Rugby (Saru), Mr Mark alexander, has made a revelation that the organisation is challenged for money and that it nearly got liquidated in 2016. He led a strong delegation of Saru, including the stakeholder executive, Mr Khaya Mayedwa, that appeared before the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation. “We’ve had challenges especially when we struggled to meet the transformation targets. We had our two major sponsorships withdrawing. But also 24 of our top players left in 2015, and all the four captains retired at the same time, as well as the resignation of the Union’s President,” Mr Alexander said. He revealed that the organisation operated on a R130 million budget deficit, and that was coupled with the 2023 Rugby World Cup bid which cost the union R36 million. “It took long to win over investor confidence. It was a tough journey, but we have now started signing sponsors in July last year. It would take long to get out of the hole in the budget,” he said. Saru came to brief the committee on governance challenges, financials, transformation and the systems. Members sought clarity on various issues, including expanding the rugby talent pool, school sport, the union’s assets, and the performances of the Springboks. Committee member Darren Bergman said transformation was still a challenge, and that if it is not thoroughly addressed, it would be a challenge to realise. “Where is the talent pool, we are drawing it from rural areas. If we make cosmetic transformation targets, it will impact us in the long run. Barriers to entry should be too easy in rugby as it is not as expensive as cricket,” Mr Bergman said. He pointed out that the spectators at rugby games need to transform, and that as long as that picture does not change, it will be difficult to motivate young black players. He also said broadcasting these sports on MultiChoice’s Supersport did not help the cause. “Proximity and ticket prices are a challenge. Until we win the fans, and we generate interest among our people, we will never get transformation right. By Sibongile Maputi
	28 August 2018 The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly.Read more