Parliament, Friday, 17 August 2018 - The Standing Committee on Appropriations joined by the Portfolio Committee on Water and Sanitation visited the Sotsoto Local Municipality yesterday where the implementation of the Bucket Eradication Programme was under close scrutiny of the committee. The committee first visited the toilet construction site at Clocolan under Sotsoto Local Municipality and discovered inhumane conditions of sewage spillages that run down the street to a nearby water stream. The committee strongly condemned the Department of Water and Sanitation, Sotsoto Local Municipality and hired contractor for allowing this condition to continue unabated. Furthermore, the committee instructed the Department of Water and Sanitation together with Sotsoto Local Municipality to urgently find a solution to address this ghastly problem by no later than the end of October. Contradictory evidence emerged at Moemaneng following report by the Department of Water and Sanitation which says there are no bucket toilets in the area although there are newly constructed flushing toilets ready for use, but people are still using bucket toilets. This is caused by the fact that there are no water provisions to be used for flushing toilets. The committee Chairperson Ms Pinky Phosa said: “It is quite evident that no feasibility study was conducted for this project before its inception. Should this have been done, the study would have shown that there is a need to put water reticulation system in place first. Secondly, poor integrated planning and lack of consequence management are also contributing factors. People are now forced to continue using the bucket toilets due to poor planning by responsible officials”. Evidence of misuse of funds allocated for Bucket Eradication Programme was visible in all sites visited. The committee made a commitment to revisit the area within three months to assess implementation and progress achieved. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS, MS PINKY PHOSA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Andile Duka (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8138
	Cell: 0632376805
	E-mail: aduka@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more