Parliament, Wednesday, 29 August 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Cooperation is concerned that South Africans are not using the consular services offered by the Department of International Relations and Cooperation (Dirco) when they are travelling or living abroad. Most South Africans do not register with the Registration of South Africans Abroad (Rosa) when they travel. Rosa enables the Department of International Relations and Cooperation to assist South African citizens in event of an emergency, such as a kidnapping, hostage-taking, cross-border child abduction or natural disaster, among others. The registration is a free, voluntary service provided by the department. Rosa is only available to South African citizens who are travelling, living or working abroad. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Siphosezwe Masango, said that there is a need to educate South Africans about these services. “Travelling abroad has never been a culture for ordinary South Africans and that might be a reason why citizens are oblivious to the kinds of support and services Dirco offers,” Mr Masango said. On Wednesday, Dirco briefed the committee about the consular services available to travellers, as well as services that are not available, such as the repatriation of mortal remains, cremations and travel logistics. The committee welcomed all initiatives to inform South Africans about services available to travellers and congratulated Dirco on its Travel Smart information campaign. Mr Masango urged Dirco to launch a national radio campaign so that people are educated about these services in their home languages. The committee also heard that about 825 South Africans are currently incarcerated in foreign jails. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND COOPERATION, MR SIPHOSEZWE MASANGO. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more