Parliament, Wednesday, 22 August 2018 – The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) is disappointed by Eskom’s failure to respond on questions on deviations and expansions. The committee was holding a hearing with Eskom on deviations and expansions on the 4th quarter of 2017/18. Scopa is not pleased with how Eskom failed to respond to questions based on the presentations that Eskom itself has provided to the committee. It is really a shame that taxpayers’ money was wasted by Eskom by bringing a big delegation to Parliament that failed to respond to questions based on a presentation prepared for them. This is a direct reflection of the management of Eskom as a company that Eskom officials do not take Parliament very seriously. It is really embarrassing that Eskom could not even respond to its own presentation. What has happened today inspires no confidence in Eskom. The committee was forced to suspend today’s hearing and reschedule for Eskom to reappear before Scopa next week Tuesday, 28 August 2018 at 18:00 to respond to questions on deviations and expansions. Scopa has also requested information in so far as Tegeta is involved on expansions and deviations, including all the officials of Eskom who are involved in those contracts. The National Treasury briefed Scopa a few months ago on deviations and expansions and has ranked Eskom number one on deviations among all entities and departments. Therefore, it becomes important for Scopa to understand the issues around these deviations and expansions. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF SCOPA, MR THEMBA GODI. For media enquiries, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party.Read more