Parliament, Thursday, 30 August 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Water and Sanitation has received an update on the development of the National Water and Sanitation Master Plan. The committee has since its inception in 2014 emphasised the need for a collaborative framework on water and sanitation resources to guide the use of this important resource. Despite the delays, the committee is content with the process so far, but has emphasised that there is urgent need to complete the planning process and implement the plan. “It is even more urgent in the context of the declining quality of water. Furthermore, while the committee welcomes a cabinet instruction to utilise the Operation Phakisa methodology in developing this plan, it is wary that this might extend the planning process, when implementation is urgently needed,” said Mr Mlungisi Johnson, the Chairperson of the Committee. The committee has emphasised the need to simplify the water value chain, as it is currently complex and cumbersome, leading to unintended consequences, especially for small and medium enterprises. For example, the problems that delays in granting water rights cause for beneficiaries of the land reform projects. Also, the committee has emphasised the need to strengthen interactions with the private sector to encourage collaboration on infrastructure development, especially infrastructure that has economic benefits. Water pollution caused mainly by municipalities and unscrupulous businesses remains of major concern to the committee. The committee has emphasised the need for municipalities to invest more in infrastructure maintance to deal with this problem. “The Department of Cooperative Governance’s Back to Basics programme is very clear that municipalities must spend 10% of their budgets on maintenance. This must be implemented and monitored,” Mr Johnson said. Non-revenue water and non-payment of services robs municipalities of the resources needed to implement infrastructure maintenance and development. “It is unacceptable that an estimated R9.9 billion in revenue is foregone by municipalities each year through non-revenue water,” Mr Johnson said. The committee is in agreement with the department that water-borne sanitation is unsustainable and that the country needs to adopt waterless sanitation made possible by technological advances. Institutions such as the Water Research Commission and institutions of higher learning are central to the implementation of these advances. The committee has also called for the current pricing strategy to be re-examined, in favour of one that rewards water users who conserve water while penalising those who ignore consumption caps. The committee remains of the view that water-use trends in South Africa are unsustainable and there is a need for a mind-set shift and increased conservation of water. Two things are important as the development of the master plan continues. Firstly, funding arrangements for the entire sector must be formalised through engagement with sister departments and sector partners to enable infrastructure development, and to harness the economic and social potential of water. Secondly, the department must conclude the planning phase for the masterplan and move towards implementation, to deal with the many challenges facing the sector. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND SANITATION, MR MLUNGISI JOHNSON For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more