Parliament, Wednesday, 15 August 2018 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Mr Richard Mdakane, has told residents of Flagstaff that a well-practised cultural initiation should not end in death. The committee is currently conducting national public hearings into the Customary Initiation Bill, which aims to regulate the practise of initiation. “Our traditions and cultural practices are beautiful. Ulwaluko is one such tradition and it should not result in deaths, when our children undergo it. Tradition and culture are things that should bring about celebration and joy,” Mr Mdakane said. “We have allowed rogue elements to take over our culture. Kids get abducted and circumcised by people whom communities do not know. Government cannot sit back and watch when our children die,” he said. The Flagstaff, Libode and Kokstad areas record high death rates every initiation season, and approximately 20 incidents were reported in the past winter season. The proposed bill is intended to modernise the initiation practice and ensure conducive conditions wherever the practice is conducted. “Culture is not static; culture evolves. It therefore must exist within the legal framework that governs the country. No one must die because he was practising culture. If it kills, that is not tradition,” Mr Mdakane said. He assured residents that the Bill is not intended to replace the Eastern Cape Male Customary Initiation Act, and said further input will be solicited from traditional leaders once the public hearings are complete. The programme for the remainder of the public hearings is available here:
	https://tinyurl.com/ya2khv7k ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, MR RICHARD MDAKANE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”.Read more