Parliament, Wednesday, 1 August 2018 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman, said the committee welcomes the focused approach adopted by the South African Police Service (SAPS) to deal with cash-in transit robberies. The good cooperation between Crime Intelligence, the DPCI (Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation) and other specialised units is key to achievement of recent breakthroughs. The committee has noted the recent arrests by SAPS of high-profile individuals and groups suspected to be involved in the cash-in-transit incidents and robberies across the country. “The units and police officers involved in the arrests of the suspects should be commended for their hard work and commitment to deal with serious crime,” Mr Beukman said.. The incidents of the last two days in rural KwaZulu-Natal indicate that syndicates are shifting focus from metropolitan areas where good cooperation between SAPS and security companies and Sabric (South African Banking Risk Information Centre) have led to several arrests and the foiling of robbery attempts. Furthermore, the recent incidents in the Western and Eastern Cape indicate that very hard work lies ahead for investigating teams. “The modus operandi of criminal syndicates is changing as new measures are introduced by the law enforcement agencies, and the SAPS needs to maximise its ability to use technology as a force multiplier to unravel syndicates,” Mr Beukman advised.. Meanwhile, the recent spate of attacks and destruction in the road and railway sector has been condemned by the committee. “It is totally unacceptable, and it is clear that more focused investigation work needs to be done by the law enforcement agencies to unmask the syndicates and groups responsible for the attacks. The bottom line is that well-placed informants and network operations are vital in this regard,” Mr Beukman said. The committee will, among other things, have a focused hearing on the transport and rail-related Crimes on 15 August 2018. The DPCI and the Division Detectives have been invited to the hearing, as well as sectoral groups. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs.Read more