The intensification of climate change has led to a deadly competition for agricultural land and access to grazing land, said the mover of the topic on “The Nexus Between Climate Change and the Incidences of Farmers/Herdsmen Conflicts in Africa”, Ms Sarah Safo, of the Ghanaian Parliament. Climate Change is one of the topics that were up for discussion at the 49th CPA African Region Conference because, she explained: “In the past the impact of climate change was moderately felt, the competition for resources was healthy. But now that is not the case. The competition has turned very violent and disruptive. And since 2015, climate change has been ranked among the five top causes of conflicts.” Besides that, Mercy Corps, she added, a UK-based humanitarian organisation, has estimated that climate change has cost Nigeria’s economy well over US$114 billion between 2012 and 2015. Reflecting on her country’s experience, she stated that “the situation in Ghana is not different as there are daily reports of deaths emanating from the clashes of farmers and herdsmen”. Worst of all, she noted, these conflicts have over time assumed ethnic, political and religious postures. But sadly, respective governments’ responses in averting these conflicts overlook climate change as their cause. At worst, “respective governments’ responses to these conflicts have been lethargic and reactional”. So too are African Parliaments, “out of frustration, they often react by calling for the deployment of the military to strife-torn areas. A reaction that often emanates from the constant cries of our people and the plea to us to bring an end to the crisis”, she said. To curb the escalation of these conflicts, she pointed out, our assemblies have enacted anti-grazing laws that make grazing in open fields or farms a punishable offence. In anticipation of ranching law in Ghana, she explained, “the Committee on Defence and Interior has been on study tours within the West Africa sub-region and some developed countries to learn from best practices”. She called upon her Parliament to come with legislation on the limitations of open range cattle ranching as one of the solutions to these conflicts. “This must be implemented to the letter through oversight activities. And steps must be immediately taken to incorporate climate change issues in the protocols that allow free movement of animals across borders.” She also suggested that in addition to that, their Parliament must intensify its legislation on Great Green Wall Project “to intensify the pace of reforestation plan for Sub-Saharan Africa to combat desertification”. She is of the view that the prospects of peace in many Sub-Saharan African countries hinge on how the competing needs of herdsmen and farmers are managed and rationalised. Concurring with the sentiments of the mover from the Ghanaian Parliament, Ms Janet Sitienei, Member of the Kenyan Parliament, observed that climate change has offset, in catastrophic proportions, Africa’s dependence on its rich natural resources and rain fed agriculture. And this has fuelled the scrambled for resources that has led to unprecedented farmers and herdsmen conflicts across Africa.  She reckoned that “the impact of climate change on Africa is likely to be severe because of adverse direct effects, high agricultural dependence, and limited capacity to adapt.” Most regrettably, he said, climate change has worsened the living conditions of those who directly depend on agricultural produce for their livelihood “this is made evident by conflicts involving livestock herders and farmers across the Continent.” Migration is another contribution factor to these conflicts, because when people can no longer sustain themselves in their areas, they often respond by moving to areas where there are more resources available, she said, and “regional migration sometimes leads to competition over natural resources in areas of high inward migration which can result in violence”. Parliaments ought to develop legislation, she suggested, that would create grazing corridors for herdsmen to avoid them encroaching into farmlands. And Kenya could learn from our fellow African countries that currently have grazing laws in place.  African countries must also embrace technology to mitigate the effects of climate change through the training of experts in related fields – and these must be subsidised and ensure that they are budgeted for,” she said. “African countries need to invest more in policy, science and technological innovations to mitigate climate change and its inherent conflicts. Such investments, though costly, will go a long way in building resilience among our people and stem unwarranted conflicts.” During the debate, there were views that the biggest polluters such as China, the United States and India must be held accountable and should contribute in helping Africa to adapt to the effects of climate change. But there was another opposing view that African countries should also be held accountable for their own contribution to climate change such as the mass deforestation in Africa which has led to desertification of its green belts. There was also a suggestion that African countries should embrace environmental indigenous knowledge systems and practices that have been tried and tested and that can help to push back the frontiers of climate change. But also, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association should be engaged to drive the agenda for the development of treaties and protocols that would bring about useful and innovative ideas that can mitigate the adverse effects of climate change in Africa. By Abel Mputing 21 August 2018 The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”.Read more