Parliament, Sunday, 12 August 2018 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training, Ms Connie September, says the resignation of Mr Sizwe Nxasana from the board of the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) is a loss to the public service. “The effectiveness and strong governance we were beginning to see at NSFAS was good to see. The committee is concerned, but hopeful that NSFAS will give the committee an update report on challenges when we meet on Thursday this week,” Ms September said. The meeting will be briefed on payment of student allowances to universities and colleges, and strategies to deal with backlogs. The Department of Higher Education and Training, Universities SA, the South African College Principals Organisation, the SA Union of Students, as well as SA Further Education and Training Student Association will also attend the meeting. “We want a functioning and a stable financial aid scheme for the students. This is the reason the committee was excited when NSFAS pioneered the student-centred model of disbursements as well as central applications under the leadership of Mr Nxasana,” Ms September said. Ms September said increases to the NSFAS budget require effective leadership. The committee is committed to free education for all qualifying groups of students, and it will ensure that the necessary support is provided to students. The committee has also noted the request of the Minister that disbursements be halted until the backlog has been addressed. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING, MS CONNIE SEPTEMBER. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party.Read more