Parliament, Wednesday, 15 August 2018 – On the first day of oversight in KwaZulu-Natal province’s Umgungundlovu District Municipality, the Portfolio Committee on Health visited Mpumuza Health Clinic and the Edendale, Fort Napier Forensic Psychiatric and Grey hospitals. Acting Chairperson for the committee, Mr Fish Mahlalela said: “The committee is conducting oversight to engage in terms of the challenges and achievements, in order to better understand the healthcare services provided.” “We are not here to criticise, but as the committee we want to assist. Therefore, issues raised here will be forwarded to the executive. It is important that during the engagement we are going to have that you be honest with us”, said Mr Mahlalela. The committee indicated that during the oversight Members will be making observations and thereafter a report will be written, which will encompass findings and recommendations. However, the committee noted with concern issues in common at the four sites visited. A common finding was a high staff vacancy rate, due to a moratorium put in place by the province on some non-clinical posts. The committee was informed that only highly skilled and specialised recruitment is possible. The staffing issue affects the level of service delivery at both clinics and hospitals. Infrastructure maintenance backlogs are another shared challenge, which has led to facilities not meeting the norms and standards stipulated by the Office of the Health Standard Compliance Office. Furthermore, the clinic and hospitals reported equipment maintenance challenges, caused by budget constraints. At Mpumuza clinic, the committee noted a shortage of medication and use of inappropriate open spaces exposed to the weather for use as waiting rooms for patients. Mpumuza is also too small to be fit for purpose. “The clinic is too small; there is no space. We cannot have a clinic that small servicing four wards. It’s a matter that needs to be attended to,” said Mr Mahlalela. At Edendale hospital the issue of space is also a major challenge and affects the way healthcare practitioners perform their duties. Patients do not have privacy in the consulting rooms. In one consulting room, the committee found four doctors, each with a patients busy with a consultation and only one stretcher. At the Fort Napier Forensic Psychiatric Hospital, staff highlighted the high vacancy rate and lack of resources. The hospital has two forensic psychiatrists, servicing the entire province. This creates further problems in terms of providing a service to the justice system. The courts refer cases to the hospital for assessment to see if the people involved are mentally fit to stand trial. The committee concurred with the briefing it had received that Fort Napier’s buildings are dilapidated and are in need of renovation and maintenance to meet the requirements of the norms and standards. The committee will on Wednesday, 15 August continue with its oversight.  ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, MR FISH MAHLALELA For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”.Read more