Parliament, Sunday, 19 August 2018  The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Mr Richard Mdakane, has reassured traditional leaders that the Customary Initiation Bill is not intended to usurp custodianship of traditional initiation. “Chiefs work well with us and we love them. Their authority is guaranteed in the constitution. Through this piece of legislation, we doing something for the nation. We can’t have a culture that brings tears to the people, Mr Mdakane said. “The committee will invite the chiefs and kings to Parliament, once the current process is finalised, to get input from them on how best to practice the tradition.” The committee held its public hearings into the bill in Rustenburg, where people emphasised the difference between medical circumcision and traditional initiation, as well as the role of the chiefs in the tradition. Mr Mdakane said it concerned Parliament when culture got distorted and often told from the perspective of people who have no interest of the culture. Distortion causes havoc. It is important for society to understand what is being taught at initiation schools. The content of the schools should be proper, such that parents feel at ease when their children are at initiation schools, he said. “Culture is about development of society we want to return better man and women from these schools. This bill provokes discussions throughout the country, he said. The public hearings move to Limpopo on Monday, Mpumalanga and Gauteng on Tuesday. The programme for the remainder of the public hearings is available here:
	https://tinyurl.com/ya2khv7k ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, MR RICHARD MDAKANE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committees Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa.Read more