Agriculture is still the mainstay of Africa’s economic growth and development, unlike other continents that have diversified their economic activities, said the Member of Parliament of Botswana, Mr Wynter Mmolotsi. He was the mover of the topic Food Security and Sustainable Growth: The role of Agriculture in triggering Economic Development in Africa at the 49th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) Africa Region Conference held in Gaborone, Botswana from 13 to 22 August 2018. “Most countries over the years have moved from being dependent on agriculture as the engine of growth, towards industrialisation. Africa still remains a largely agrarian economy.” The political circumstances inflicted upon Africa, he emphasised, have reduced Africa to a recipient of food aid when, and yet it is so endowed with agricultural resources. African parliaments and governments must modernise agriculture because “demand for food is growing strongly, and national diets are shifting away from food staples, like grains, towards more horticultural and livestock products, and processed and pre-cooked food,” Mr Mmolotsi said. Prospects for African agriculture have a favourable outlook because, according to him, the demand for food continues to grow strongly, and is projected to more than double by 2050. However, climate change will offset many of the gains that can be drawn from the agricultural sector. “Challenges are immense and require dedicated commitment to solving them,” he pointed out. But if responsive and proactive legislation and policies can be harnessed, agriculture can be a catalyst for economic growth and sustainable development. This initiative has been driven mainly by the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP). Regrettably, CAADP’s report states that Botswana’s agricultural sector has experienced a steady decline. This, he observed, is attributed to lack of investment to agricultural infrastructure. Cameroon is among the countries in Africa that have put extra effort into the fight against the reduction of poverty, said the Member of the Parliament of Cameroon, Ms Muyali Boya, “Cameroon has succeeded to reduce the proportion of people suffering from hunger by half between the period of 1990-1992 and 2014-2016.” Agriculture remains the backbone of Cameroon’s economy employing 70% of its workforce, while providing 42% of its gross domestic product and 3% of its export revenue. “Cameroon’s agriculture remained largely (about 80%) subsistent for many years and mostly carried out in rural areas by the rural population.” But now Cameroon intends to change this trajectory by migrating its agricultural sector to the Second Generation Agriculture, which is based on supporting and strengthening rural and small holder farmers. Second generation agriculture implies, she explained, modernised methods of farming; provision of better training to farmers and “taking advantage of scientific innovations and securing innovative financing. It equally entails local processing of raw materials, increase in crop exportation, reduction in the importation of some food crops and creation of jobs.” This demands, she pointed out, a more effective and efficient synergies of a sustainable implementation model. The deliberations on this topic reemphasised the fact that agricultural revolution is needed to empower and invest in the rural communities to be part of the mainstream economies of their respective countries and to effectively capitalise on their potentials to trigger nationwide economic development to ensure food security and sustainable growth in Africa. It was also emphasised that food security equals to national security and is the heartbeat of every country’s wellbeing for it is an ingredient of Africa’s gross domestic product (GDP). But what is needed is the full exploitation of the agro-industry and its value chain and if harnessed well it can increase the value of agriculture and it can be a catalyst for Africa’s economic revolution. There was a unanimous agreement that the critical role of African parliaments in ensuring that this is achieved cannot be overemphasised. If African governments are not held accountable by their respective parliaments in this regard they will undermine the potential of agriculture in turning the economic tide and in reducing poverty on the continent. A vison that is one of the pillars of Africa Agenda 2063. Abel Mputing
	22 August 2018 The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed.Read more