Parliament, Monday, 13 August 2018 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Mr Richard Mdakane, has voiced satisfaction with proceedings at day one of public hearings into the Customary Initiation Bill in Port Elizabeth. Mr Mdakane said public input would enrich the Bill and that it was important for South Africans to say how they want to see their traditions practiced. “We want to hear how people on the ground see and feel about customary initiation. Initiation is a beautiful tradition, but there are challenges. The people must help us ensure that no one dies at initiation schools.” Today, the committee started public hearings into the Bill, which is intended to improve conditions at initiation schools. The Bill also makes provision for doctors to be involved from day one, but also ensures that the custom is in the hands of those who value it. Mr Mdakane said initiation has been hijacked by rogue elements and he called on its custodians to help root out those who disregard it. “Tradition should be exciting and should be a joyous process. Legislation-making is our responsibility in Parliament, but we must do it with the people. Help us find solutions.” He said people needed to accept that customs evolve with time and that there might be a need modify them to ensure that they are practiced within the realm of the law. The programme for the public hearings is available here:
	https://tinyurl.com/ya2khv7k ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, MR RICHARD MDAKANE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more