Parliament, Tuesday, 14 August 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Economic Development will today continue on day 2 of its week-long oversight in the North West Province. The Committee has in the past identified the tourism sector as a point of oversight interest. The sector is at the centre of the South African economic policy regime and has been identified as a key job driver in both the National Growth and Industrial Policy action plans. Previous briefings received by the committee have revealed serious competition and transformation-related challenges, which has made it difficult for smaller players to enter and thrive in the sector. While the committee seeks to deal with these issues through the Competition Amendment Bill [B 23—2018], it has identified big projects, such as Sun City amongst others, as means to assess market dominance and influence in the region and province. Today, the committee met with Sun City management to discuss and be briefed on ownership, management, job creation, enterprise development, the number of entrepreneurs and black-owned B&Bs and guest houses in the area. The committee is further this week scheduled to have briefings and deliberations with the management and stakeholders of the Madikwe establishment, including the relevant municipality on tourism in the area. Sites to be visited this week include the tourism incubator pilot project in Moruleng, the Mphebatho Museum in Moruleng Village, as supported by the Bakgatla Traditional Authority, and the Homestay programme in the Moruleng area. Details of the oversight visit for day 2 are as follows: Date: Tuesday, 14 August 2018
	Time: 09:00
	Venue: Moses Kotane Local Municipality
	Stand No. 933, Station Road, Unit 3
	Mogwase Shopping Complex
	Mogwase ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, MS ELSIE COLEMAN. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Felicia Lombard
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly.Read more