The Department of Public Works came under fire today at Parliament from members of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) on the exorbitant prices the department has paid for braai areas in ministerial houses. Scopa held a follow up hearing on irregular, fruitless and wasteful expenditure with the Department of Public Works as well as the correspondence Scopa received from the department. The Chairperson of Scopa, Mr Themba Godi has questioned the rationale behind having these braai areas, as standard features for ministerial houses. “The braai places or the entertainment areas are part of the features that you are looking for in a house. So if it doesn’t have them they have to be there because that is standard. It is not that a certain minister requested that they need an entertainment place. The point that everyone is raising on this issue is that it is a mind-set thing of how we relate to power. Does it become a licence to just splurge in any other way? The Minister of Public Service and Administration is already complaining that some Cabinet ministers are refusing to trim down on their personnel”, he said. Mr Godi further requested the Minister of Public Works, Mr Thulas Nxesi to change the manner in which the accommodation of ministers and Members of Parliament is referred to. “Minister, as part of your legacy before you exist next year. Change this thing from prestige accommodation. I think it is too classist. It will be fine if you call them ministerial houses and parliamentary villages because this prestige thing actually psychologically enables this spending because it is supposed to be prestige”, said Mr Godi. Other members of Scopa also voiced their unhappiness with the issue of entertainment areas. Mr Mkhululeko Hlangwa complained about the various costs of the “braai areas” per house. “I do not buy that a braai area or entertainment area as it is being sanitised now still suffices to the extent to which one of the houses can have an entertainment area that costs R150 721.11. This is a very expensive braai area. Half a million rands to turn meat and drink wine while South Africans live in a sea of poverty. You are creating islands of sophisticated luxury. It is totally unacceptable. It is a slap in the face for the majority of South Africans. There is no justification for this luxurious splurging. If prestige is going to be an abuse, then we need to actually revisit it. Was it actually designed for it to be a waste?”, said Mr Hlengwa. Scopa lamented the fact that about half a million rands has been spent on entertainment areas for the purposes of braai areas in three ministerial houses. Scopa has requested the Department of Public Works to reappear before the committee next Wednesday, 29 August 2018 with further details. By: Faith Ndenze 21 August 2018 Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more