Parliament, Wednesday, 22 August 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises was scheduled to be briefed by Transnet on the outcomes of its investigation report into allegations of corruption and irregularities. Members of the committee registered their discomfort with being briefed about a report by those who are being investigated. The committee said it would be highly inappropriate to be briefed by those who are alleged to be implicated. After a caucus with committee Members, the committee Chairperson Ms Lungi Mnganga-Gcabashe said: “In our interaction, we have learnt that the board has issued letters to some executives. We therefore have decided as the committee to give the board space to continue with its processes and to completely familiarise themselves with the reports of the investigation. The board has been in for a few weeks. The board needs to take ownership of the report.” Ms Mnganga-Gcabashe said another meeting with the board will be scheduled. At the meeting, the committee resolved to only focus on the second part of the report that deals with the progress of Transnet’s Second Defined Benefit Fund. The fund was established in 2000 for the benefit of existing retired members and qualifying beneficiaries. The committee expressed its concern about the delays in resolving this matter, as it is disadvantaging struggling pensioners. The committee cannot understand Transnet’s difficulty in paying its pensioners, nor why it has taken such a long time to do so. The committee is of the view that this is an embarrassment for the government. The Chairperson of the board, Mr Popo Molefe, said, “As the new board, we are committed in dealing with the matter of the pensioners in the most humane manner.” ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES MS LUNGI MNGANGA-GCABASHE For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s media officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”.Read more