Parliament, Monday, 13 August 2018 – The portfolio committees on Basic Education and Water and Sanitation have stressed the need to urgently eradicate the sanitation infrastructure backlog at schools in the North West Province. Both Committees are undertaking a week-long oversight visit to the province. The committees highlighted that it was unacceptable that young children as those in Grade R continue to be subjected to substandard pit latrines endangering their lives. The committees held a joint meeting over a range of issues such as the readiness to deliver end of the year exams as well as the state of infrastructure in the province. It was reported by the Provincial Education Department that about 154 schools still have pit latrines in the province. Of this number, 119 are primary schools and 35 are high schools which will cost an estimated R279 million to build. Of this 154 schools the department has only budgeted money to eradicate pit latrines in only 50 schools. “More effort must be put into eradicating the backlog. Furthermore, the department must consult institutions such as the Water Research Commission for innovative systems that can assist the DBE in dealing with the huge infrastructure backlogs,” said Mr Mlungisi Johnson, the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Water and Sanitation. The Portfolio Committee on Basic Education highlighted the need for standardisation and use of technology that will ensure that many latrines are constructed at a fraction of the current cost that the department is paying. “While we acknowledge the challenge that the DBE raised in relation to the Department of Public Works being responsible for the building of state infrastructure, it is of the view that the R90 million budgeted for the 50 schools this year could go even further and build more latrines. The use of technological advances has the potential of utilising the limited budget to build more facilities,” said Ms Nomalungelo Gina, the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education. Meanwhile, the underperformance in spending conditional grants was pointed out as a red flag which needs urgent attention. The department informed the committees that it has so far spent about 5% of the Mathematics, Science and Technology (MST) conditional grant despite the huge challenge South Africa faces in relation to these subjects. Furthermore, the committee is concerned that the department has only spent 20.4% of the National School Nutrition programme by the end of the first quarter. The committee is of the view that proper planning should be done to ensure that spending is in par with projections. Despite this, the committee welcomed the measures that the department is implementing to deal with the underspending. The committee welcomes the assurance that the province is ready to deliver National Senior Certificate examinations at the end of 2018. What is most important is the readiness of learners to write their exams as well as processes to guarantee the safety of question papers and answer sheets. “Following a visit to a district storage facility, the committee is confident that the protocols implemented will ensure that the province will deliver credible and secure examinations,” Ms Gina emphasised. The good work done at the Taung Teacher Enrichment centre was welcomed by the committee. The support provided to teachers and learners is impressive despite the difficult operating environment. Despite this, the committee has stressed the need to implement maintenance programme at the centre as it is dilapidated currently. The committee welcomed the information that the department managed to complete the nomination process of School Governing Bodies by the end of March 2018 and have implemented capacity building programmes to ensure functionality. Both Committees will today visit various schools within the Dr Ruth Segomotsi Mompati Education District. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSONS OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS NOMALUNGELO GINA AND PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND SANITATION, MR MLUNGISI JOHNSON For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more