Parliament, Thursday, 30 August 2018 – The Multi-Party Women’s Caucus (MPWC) today met and applauded the recommendation of the panel on zero-rated value-added tax (VAT) items, instituted by National Treasury (NT), that sanitary products to the poor and indigent should be free of charge. The committee Chairperson, Ms Rosalia Storey Morutoa, said through the whip, Ms Nthabiseng Khunou: “This is a milestone, an achievement for the MPWC. We have been advocating for this for some time. It should be celebrated. We understand it is just a recommendation at this stage, but it is progress nonetheless.” The MPWC today received a briefing from the NT indicating that the closing date for input on what should be included in the list of zero-rated VAT items is tomorrow, 31 August 2018. The MPWC encouraged all South Africans who have not yet submitted comments to the NT, to do so before tomorrow’s deadline on vatsubmissions@treasury.gov.za. The committee heard that the panel briefed the Standing Committee on Finance on 28 August and indicated that zero-rated sanitary products would be a blunt instrument, as it would apply to both rich and poor, and therefore have little impact. It recommended that VAT should still apply to these products, but that free sanitary towels should be provided to indigent and poor South Africans. All South Africans are also encouraged to participate in the public hearings on this matter, which will be held at a later stage. The MPWC resolved that women must be empowered to manufacture sanitary towels in an effort to develop themselves financially. This could be done in the form of co-operatives. “This will help in lifting women out of poverty,” said Ms Khunou. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE MULTI-PARTY WOMEN’S CAUCUS For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly.Read more