The 49th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) African Region Conference opened officially on Saturday. The speakers who presiding over its opening emphasised the importance of the theme: The Role of Parliaments in Fostering Regional and National Security. In her opening address, The President of the CPA Africa Region and the Speaker of the National Assembly of Botswana, Ms Gladys Kokorwe, stressed the significance of the theme to the future of the continent. “In its broad sense, security is necessary for stability and socio-economic development in Africa. This theme challenges us to determine what role we can play in this regard.” The theme, she emphasised, should not be looked at in a linear way, but be embraced in its totality to ensure food security. “This conference affords us an opportunity to share experiences and to facilitate measures that will tackle the impact of climate change on food security in our respective countries and on the continent.” We are optimistic that “when all is said and done we would be better off as the region than we were before this conference,” she said. CPA’s founding values of human rights, peace and security, its culture of human rights and good governance clearly demonstrate that it has the necessary tools to resolve conflicts, said the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians Africa Region, Ms Thoko Didiza, from South Africa. What is currently missing is the role of women in this regard. The role of women in conflict resolutions, peace missions, in defence and security sector is critical if we were to attain the goal of this conference, she said. The theme of this conference “speaks directly to the silencing of guns in Africa, which is one of the priorities of the Africa Agenda 2063,” Ms Didiza said. As parliamentarians, we must determine not only how we can measure its progress, but also what role women can play in the execution of this aspiration. “The women’s role in overthrowing colonialism is recorded. In South Africa we are, in this month, commemorating the contribution of women, such as MaSisulu, in the liberation struggle of our country and in ushering in our democracy. This shows that women can make a difference in this regard.” The threat to our security whether real or imagined demand innovative thinking, said the Chairperson of CPA Africa Region, Ms Lindiwe Maseko. “It is hoped that delegates will share country experiences that will enable us to come up with legislative frameworks that will advocate for new security frameworks that will foster peace and territorial integrity of our countries.” Reflecting on her tenure, she urged the incoming office bearers of the CPA Africa Region not to relent on changing the status of the CPA. “The changing of the CPA status is an ongoing struggle. Don’t relent, we are close to attaining this goal.” Its transformation, she stressed, “should encompass its nature and character, its organizational identity, its aims and objectives, its values and funding options.” Reiterating the significance of changing the status of the CPA, the Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of Cameroon and the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, Ms Emilia Lifaka, said it was not a question of if, but when the status of the CPA will change. She admitted that this matter has divided the CPA, but she also commended Africa’s unyielding resolve to change the status of the CPA from a charity organisation to an international organisation that has a recognised parliamentary status. On the growing influence of Africa in the CPA, she said “Africa’s collective voice is indisputable. My ascension to the chairpersonship of the CPA would not have be achieved without this conviction and the architects of thereof.” She commended Ms Maseko’s resolve in putting Africa’s interest high on CPA’s agenda. “Ms Maseko, thank you for job well done. You always aimed for the sky and your resolve has landed the Africa Region at the helm of the CPA. Thank you for your love of Africa. You have showed us that an Africa with one collective voice is indisputable.” Security is a precondition for development and parliaments’ role in this regard cannot be overemphasised, said the Deputy President of Botswana, Mr Slumber Tsogwane. Our parliaments are faced with challenges of executive overreach, but “Despite that they must strive to seek ways that will enable them to be beyond reproach,” he said. They must use their mandates to pass good laws and policies, hold the executive to account and fight corruption. This is significant because stronger parliaments breed stronger democracies, he said. The oversight role of African parliaments needs to be strengthened, he reiterated, to ensure that they uphold the aspirations of the people, and ensure that policies and budgets that they pass are aligned to the shared values of their respective countries. Weighing in on the changing status of the CPA, he said, “I concur that CPA should be repositioned to promote the advancement of parliamentary democracy in Africa.” Abel Mputing 20 August 2018 The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly.Read more