Parliament, Tuesday, 07 August 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Transport would like to correct the narrative that the draft Road Accident Benefit Scheme (Rabs) Bill seeks to do away with the use of lawyers when road accident victims submit claims for compensation. What the Rabs Bill seeks to do is to give the victims of road accidents the option of claiming through a scheme administrator, rather than a lawyer. This will enable the public to avoid relying on lawyers. The committee assures the public that the legislation is not going to outlaw the use of lawyers by road accident victims. It simply provides a choice for road accident victims to make direct claims or use lawyers. The bill seeks to replace the Road Accident Fund Act; to improve the administration of benefits and payouts to accident victims; to provide for a social security scheme for the victims of road accidents; and to establish the Rabs Administrator to administer and implement the scheme. Today, the committee held public hearings on the bill in Welkom in Free State, where the bill continued to receive mixed reactions from various sectors of society. The next public hearings will be held tomorrow in the Northern Cape. Details for the Northern Cape public hearings: Date: Wednesday, 08 August 2018
	Venue: Kimberley Town Hall, Frances Baard District Municipality
	Time: 10:00 – 13:00 ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, MS DIKELEDI MAGADZI. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sakhile Mokoena
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2804
	Cell: 081 705 2130
	E-mail: smokoena@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more