Parliament, Thursday, 2 August 2018 – A delegation of the Joint Constitutional Review Committee (CRC) concluded public hearings on a possible amendment of section 25 of the Constitution in Oudtshoorn and Beaufort West. The Co-Chairperson, Mr Vincent Smith, said the committee is extremely pleased with the huge turnout at both venues. “We had South Africans coming out in big numbers to make their voices heard. They were clear and concise. The input was structured in such a way to take the work of the committee forward.” Mr Smith commended the public for the spirit in which the hearings around the country have been taking place. “Although this is a very emotive issue, South Africans have given each other an opportunity to have their say – even when they did not agree. They were extremely tolerant.” Regarding the concern raised by some about the recent announcement by President Cyril Ramaphosa on the expropriation of land without compensation, Mr Smith said this announcement will in no way take away from the work of the committee as many political parties have made resolutions and pronouncements on the matter, just like leader of the ruling party did. The committee was instructed by the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces to ascertain whether a review of section 25 of the Constitution and other clauses are necessary, to make it possible for the state to expropriate land in the public interest without compensation, and propose the necessary constitutional amendments where necessary. The committee already held hearings in all provinces and will conclude its hearings on Saturday in the Cape Metro. Members of the media intending to attend the hearings should please send their details (name, media house and contact details) to razzakani@parliament.gov.za. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CO-CHAIRPERSON OF THE JOINT CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE, MR VINCENT SMITH. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more