Parliament, Wednesday, 15 August 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Social Development today received a briefing from the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) on progress made on the implementation of the Constitutional Court judgement. The presentation on the briefing included an update on the progress that has been achieved by Sassa with payments to beneficiaries from April 2018 to August 2018. The committee was informed that Sassa has reduced the number of beneficiaries paid by Cash Paymaster Services by 2 063 163 to 1 098 669. Sassa also reported to the committee that there were no major challenges experienced in August in payments to beneficiaries compared to July. These payments were deposited through the Post Bank account cards in August. The South African Post Office will also pilot cash payment solutions at 18 sites across the country. The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Zoleka Capa, said she is very impressed with the good work which Sassa has done so far in the implementation of the Constitutional Court judgement. She told Sassa that Post Offices are not meant for a large number of people and the beneficiaries should not be subjected to long queues. “The Department of Social Development must do something about that,” said Ms Capa. Ms Capa thanked the assistance provided by the social workers of the Department of Social Development, especially on community work. “Social workers assist the people and also the public will be empowered by their availability,” said Ms Capa. She commended the partnership established between councillors, traditional leaders as stakeholders to assist Sassa in the delivery of services to the people. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT, MS ZOLEKA CAPA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Zizipho Klaas
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 503 1840
	E-mail: zklaas@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”.Read more