Parliament, Wednesday, 22 August 2018 – The Joint Constitutional Review Committee met today to discuss the selection of presenters to make oral representations on the amendment of section 25 of the Constitution. The committee was briefed on the report from the provincial public hearings and discussed the service provider’s interim report on written submissions. Identified names for oral submissions were presented during the committee meeting. The list includes religious groups, academic institutions, the private sector, advocacy groups, civil society, the agricultural sector, professional bodies and cultural movements. The committee was instructed by the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces to ascertain whether a review of section 25 of the constitution and other clauses is necessary, to make it possible for the state to expropriate land in the public interest without compensation, and propose the necessary constitutional amendments where necessary. The committee decided not to open up new requests for oral submissions. The committee agreed that no political party and government department will be invited to make oral submissions. Co-chairperson Mr Vincent Smith said the interim report presented in the meeting is based on the 149 886 written submissions that have been analysed so far. The total number of submissions must still be determined, as there are duplications. During the engagement, the committee raised concerns about the service provider’s report. The committee felt that as presented in the report, the views described are very different to those expressed in the oral submissions made during the public hearings. For this reason, the committee wants to hear how the service provider analysed the written submissions for the report. The committee agreed that the service provider should be invited to brief the committee on the interim report, so that it can respond to questions raised during the meeting. On the report about the public hearings, committee Members expressed concerns about its quality. The committee asked for all the electronic recordings of the public hearings in all the provinces. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CO-CHAIRPERSONS OF THE JOINT CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE, MR VINCENT SMITH AND MR LEWIS NZIMANDE For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”.Read more