Parliament, Tuesday, 4 August 2018 – The Joint Constitutional Review Committee (CRC) today commence with the process of oral submissions in Parliament, listening to several organisations and academics. A total of 10 presentations were heard by the committee today. The committee heard a divergence of voices today. Academics and agriculture organisations were generally not in favour of amending section 25 of the Constitution, which will allow for expropriation of land without compensation. The committee heard that an amendment of the Constitution to make this possible will not address land reform. Some presenters, such as Cosatu (Congress of South African Trade Unions) came in support of empowering government to expropriate land either by way of a constitutional amendment or necessary legislation if it will advance land reform. They gave specific categories like abandoned land, neglected land owned by absentee landlords and idle land that is needed for productive public use. Co-Chairperson Mr Lewis Nzimande commended the hearings and said this is a continuation of the process that happened in all the provinces and with the same weight being given to all presentations. Oral presentations continue tomorrow. Please find the link for the draft programme
	https://tinyurl.com/ycyuezhf which is subject to change. Details are as follows: 
	Date: Wednesday, 5 September 2018
	Time:  10:00
	Venue: Committee Room, Old Assembly Chamber, Ground Floor, Old Assembly Building ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CO-CHAIRPERSON OF THE JOINT CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE, MR LEWIS NZIMANDE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)Tel: 021 403 8437Cell: 081 703 9542E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion.Read more