Parliament, Thursday, 3 August 2018 – A delegation of the Joint Constitutional Review Committee conducted public hearings in Citrusdal into possible amendment of section 25 of the Constitution. The committee received a variety of views from the public, which was made up of people like farmers, farm workers, and representatives from various political parties from the local community and neighboring communities. The committee heard differing views on the possible amendment of section 25 of the Constitution. There were people who were in favour of the amendment without compensation and those who were against the amendment. Those who were against said it would have a negatively impact on the economy of the country and on food security. During the hearings some of the presenters dismissed the view that expropriation of land without compensation will affect food security. Some of the oral presentations made were in favour of land reform but not the amendment of the Constitution, as the presenters were of the view that the Constitution allows for land reform without having to amend the Constitution. A call was made by various presenters that a moratorium should be placed on farm evictions as the process of public hearings on the possible amendment of section 25 of the Constitution is underway. People were of the view that the hearings will escalate farm evictions for the farm dwellers by farm owners. The committee thanked the community of Citrusdal for handling themselves in an orderly manner. The public participation engagement will move to Swellendam on the 3rd of August. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CO-CHAIRPERSON OF THE JOINT CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE, MR LEWIS NZIMANDE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa LanduParliamentary Communication ServicesTel: 021 403 8203Cell: 081 497 4694E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly.Read more