Parliament, Thursday, 23 August 2018 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman, has commended the police for the arrest of five police officers in Vredenburg (Western Cape) for alleged fraud, drug dealing and corruption. “The fight against crime begins with rooting out rogue elements within the police to ensure that only credible and dedicated officers remain in the service. The arrest of these five officers is another step in the right direction in cleansing the South African Police Service (Saps) of undesirable elements,” Mr Beukman said. It is alleged that the suspects were colluding with members of the public to carry out activities including the transportation of drugs while on duty, taking bribes and falsifying information. The committee urges the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (the Hawks) together with crime intelligence to work steadfastly to root out corrupt officers, so that the Saps retains credibility in the eyes of the people. The committee also calls for the speedy implementation of lifestyle audits to root out officers that might be living beyond their means. The entire criminal justice system must work together to ensure that the suspects are prosecuted and given lengthy custodial sentences. Similarly, the committee welcomes the arrest of a further five officers from Beacon Bay (Eastern Cape) for fraud and corruption. The five allegedly conspired to loot a truck that had been involved in an accident between East London and Macleantown on Tuesday afternoon. “It is unacceptable that people employed to enforce the law are the very people that break the law,” Mr Beukman emphasised. The committee condemns in the strongest terms possible any acts of criminality, especially by members of the Saps. The committee will engage the National Commissioner to hear how many members have been arrested in the past three years what systems have been put in place to deal with the arrested officers. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament.Read more