Parliament, Tuesday, 21 August 2018 – The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) is concerned about how the department has spent almost half a million rand (R500 000) in braai entertainment areas in ministerial houses. Scopa is of the view that South Africans cannot be expected to pay that amount of money just for a braai area for a minister. The committee is concerned about what seems to be a priority for government. Is it really necessary to spend that kind of money just for a braai area for a cabinet minister? Scopa is also worried about how the houses allocated to ministers and deputy ministers are utilised. The state is spending exorbitant amounts of taxpayers’ money on buying and maintaining these houses when some of them are not even being utilised by ministers or deputy ministers. Scopa has learnt that the department owns 148 prestige accommodation that is allocated to ministers and deputy ministers. Scopa has requested the department to provide the committee with a report of how much each of these houses are costing the government in maintenance, rates and taxes for the past two financial years. The committee has also asked for a detailed report on which of these houses have been declared heritage sites and the cost of maintaining these houses. The committee is also concerned about the lack of a cap for the purchasing of ministerial houses because the committee has learned that the department spends as much as R9 million for a certain ministerial house while other ministers live in ministers that cost about R4 million. What informs the purchasing for these houses? It is really concerning that the department has no manual for those kinds of purchases. Scopa’s contention is that it is inherent in this department to attract all sorts of characters who want to make a quick buck. Scopa has requested the department to come back next week Wednesday, 29 August 2018 at 18:00 for a full report-back on the details relating to the four companies which are KI Developers, Varymix Nineteen Pty Ltd, Sebushi Somo and MEONDO Trading, among other issues. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF SCOPA, MR THEMBA GODI. For media enquiries, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more