The National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) appeared before the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training yesterday at Parliament to present an update to the committee on NSFAS allowance payments at universities and Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) colleges. The briefing followed the committee’s own inquest in the same matter, whereby 80% out of all universities and TVET colleges provided the committee with information about the state of affairs with regard to the NSFAS funds allocation and challenges. The committee invited the Department of Higher Education and Training, Universities South Africa, South African College Principals Organisation, South African Union of Students and the South African Further Education and Training Students Association to the briefing meeting. The committee wanted information with regard to the dates in which upfront payments were made to universities and TVET colleges by NSFAS in the 2018 academic year, amount received and percentages. The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Connie September, said that although there are backlogs from 2017 academic year, the committee has been able to establish that payments were indeed made to universities and TVET colleges in the first quarter of 2018. “The report of our inquest has painted a comprehensive view on the challenges facing the institutions of higher learning with regard to NSFAS allocations, including ICT systems inefficiency, funding of students with disabilities, integration of systems and poor communication and data verification,” said Ms September. The Chief Executive Officer of NSFAS Mr Steven Zwane, who made the presentation, attributed many of the backlogs to the student-centred funding allocation system which was later found not to be fit for purpose. He said that the lack of clear Service Level Agreements between NSFAS, universities and TVET colleges also posed a serious challenge. The department told the committee that Minister Naledi Pandor will appoint the Administrator in terms of the NSFAS Act to take over governance and management of NSFAS from the current board, in order to improve the current funding system. The President of the South African Union of Students, Mr Misheck Mugabe, made a warning at the meeting to the board and senior management of NSFAS, together with the Department of Higher Education and Training, about the looming nation-wide student protest regarding the allocation of outstanding funds for student allowances. In his presentation, Mr Mugabe highlighted the plight of students who are frustrated by the dysfunctional application system of the NSFAS and appealed to the Chairperson of the Board, Mr Neil Garrod, to establish a toll-free number to be used by students when making applications for funding. He reiterated that Nsfas should allocate funds timeously to the deserving students. “There current student protests at the University of Venda, University of Limpopo, University of Mpumalanga and some TVET colleges, may soon become a national protest if NSFAS continues to fail in addressing the backlog of disbursing outstanding allowances,” said Mr Mugabe. He applauded the committee for taking a proactive stance in ensuring that NSFAS allocations to universities and Tvet colleges, as well as student allowances in the 2018 academic year, become a smooth operation. Mr Mugabe further appealed for more efficient Internet service at the offices of the National Youth Development Agency, saying that more often students are frustrated when making applications to NSFAS. On Friday, the Minister of Higher Education and Training, Ms Naledi Pandor, appointed Dr Randall Carollissen as NSFAS Administrator. The appointment was made after the committee had encouraged the Minister to move swiftly in appointing the Administrator who will ensure that in September NSFAS is ready to accept applications for funding for the 2019 academic year. Ms September thanked the South African Union of Students, South African College Principals Organisation and South African Further Education and Training Students Association, as well as other role players for participating in the briefing and committing to assist in addressing the challenges. By Zizipho Klaas and Justice Molafo 17 August 2018 The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament.Read more