Parliament, Wednesday, 15 August 2018 – On the second day of is oversight visit to the Free State, the Standing Committee on Appropriations visited health facilities in Thabo Nchu. The committee was supported by the provincial Standing Committee on Public Accounts. The committees first visited Dr JS Moroka Hospital followed by a visit to Phekolong Clinic, Reddersburg and later Nelson Rholihlahla Mandela Clinic. Opening the stakeholder engagement session, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Appropriation, Ms Yvonne Phosa, stated: “We are aware that the Free State Province has prioritised these key health infrastructure improvement services: to refurbish old buildings, [to attend to] mechanical and electrical maintenance backlogs, and [also the] provision of medical equipment backlogs.” The committee commended Free State Health Department for its commitment to address infrastructure problems and to strengthen human resource capacity. “Health infrastructure is the backbone of efficient public health care, which is in turn the pillar of a vibrant, healthy and prosperous society, and it contributes towards a thriving economy,” added Ms Phosa. The committee was disappointed with the lack of an updated presentation from management at Dr JS Moroka Hospital, which instead presented information that they had presented to the National Council of Provinces earlier this year. The committee also commended Phekolong Clinic management for the excellent manner in which the clinic is managed. General challenges noted across all heath facilities visited included budget constraints, which are affecting infrastructure maintenance including medical equipment; the absence of facility management plans; staff shortages and the non-payment of overtime. “Generally we are pleased with what we have seen today. This means that all state agencies must take active steps to improve operational efficiencies and accelerate the effectiveness of service delivery,” said Ms Phosa. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS, MS YVONNE PHOSA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Andile Duka (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8138
	Cell: 0632376805
	E-mail: aduka@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament.Read more