Parliament, Saturday, 4 August 2018 – A delegation of the Joint Constitutional Review Committee concluded its public hearings in Swellendam into the possible amendment of section 25 of the Constitution. The Co-Chairperson for the committee, Mr Lewis Nzimande, said residents of Swellendam came in their numbers to make their opinions known on the possible amendment of section 25 of the Constitution. People expressed their displeasure on how government has handled the issue of land reform. Presenters criticised the government for the slow pace in handling the matter of land reform, saying it has resulted in poverty, unemployment and inequality. Presenters said the call to urgently review the amendment of section 25 of the Constitution will allow for the land redistribution and restitution which will bring dignity to the majority of South Africans. The announcement by the President that the ruling party will amend section 25 of the Constitution was a major concern. Some of the presenters felt that the announcement undermines the parliamentary process which has not been concluded by the committee. Mr Nzimande commended the community of Swellendam on how they had conducted themselves during the hearings. On Saturday (4 August) the committee will wrap up the provincial public hearings in Cape Town. The committee conducted public hearings in all the nine provinces and the Western Cape will be the last province to undertake the public participation process. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CO-CHAIRPERSON OF THE JOINT CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE, MR LEWIS NZIMANDE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more