Parliament, Wednesday, 15 August 2018 – The Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) appeared before the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training at Parliament yesterday (Tuesday 14 August) to brief the committee on gender-based violence and gender transformation at the South African institutions of higher learning. Briefing the committee the Chairperson and the Chief Executive of the commission told the committee that the implementation of the policies on gender transformation and policies against the abuse of women at the institutions of higher learning in South Africa is very poor and non-existent at some institutions. They said the commission discovered in its latest survey that the awareness about the existence of the policies such as sexual harassment and other very important safety policies are not part of the induction or orientation programmes of the new students at the university campuses. “The policies exist in the intranets only” The committee also heard, among other things, that the culture of male domination is on the rise at the South African universities and that universities don’t have specific policies on the safety of students especially the most vulnerable ones. The commission said that it encourages the universities to forge concrete ties of cooperation with the South African Police Services in the fight against gender based violence. In welcoming the briefing, the Chairperson of the Committee Ms Connie September told the commission that the committee wants change at the institutions of higher learning. “We must agree that we have failed the young women at these institutions, we have not given them support they deserve from us and that we should be shameful about that” stressed Ms September. Ms September thanked the commission for the report and told it that its meeting with the committee on the matter of gender transformation at the institutions of higher learning and other related issues is not the last one. “This one marks the continuation of more engagements with you and other relevant stakeholders until the objectives of gender transformation at the institutions of higher learning are achieved and the culture of patriarchy is removed” said Ms September. She called upon the Department of Higher Education and Training to work closer with the commission to achieve better results on all the aspects of transformation at the institutions of higher learning. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING, MS CONNIE SEPTEMBER. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mava Lukani (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 0815031840
	E-mail: mlukani@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament.Read more