Parliament, Saturday, 04 August 2018 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman, has expressed serious concern about the effectiveness of the safety strategy of the South African Police Services at station level following the Kareedouw station attack early this morning. The Committee condemns this act in the strongest terms. It is concerning that criminals have become so brazen that police stations, institutions at the centre of the fight against crime, are being targeted as playgrounds for the commitment of crimes. It is also concerning that police firearms stolen at the station will add to the pool of firearms to be used in criminal activities. The Committe also notes that this robbery happened despite the assurance given by SAPS management earlier this year that safety at police stations will be upgraded. Police management also gave an undertaking that the necessary training to prevent such attacks will take place. “There is clearly shortcomings in the implementation in the plan and police management will have to account for this failure” Mr Beukman emphasised. The Committee has for some time now called for the rethinking of police station safety and the integration of technology to effectively combat crime. While the Committee is cognisant of the long term nature of incorporating IT in to the security strategy, it had called for urgent steps in dealing with this seemingly growing trend. The Committee, however, welcomes the announcement confirming the activation of units to track and apprehend the perpetrators of this crime. Furthermore, the retrieval of the firearms stolen is of foremost importance. The Committee will upon the restart of the term of Parliament request the SAPS management to give an update on all attacks at police stations and progress in preventing this worrying trend. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion.Read more