Parliament, Sunday 25 March 2018 – On Wednesday, Deputy President David Mabuza will appear for his first oral questions session before the National Council of Provinces since his appointment. He appeared in the National Assembly last week for his first oral questions session in that House. Also scheduled to answer oral questions before the National Council of Provinces this week are the Ministers of International Relations and Cooperation, State Security and Home Affairs. Their questions session is scheduled for the National Council of Provinces plenary sitting on Tuesday. These regular oral questions sessions are one of the ways in which Parliament holds the Executive to account. The National Assembly’s plenary sitting on Tuesday will feature condolences for Ms Fezeka Loliwe. Ms Loliwe was Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Labour when she died in a car accident earlier this month while travelling in the Eastern Cape to do constituency work. The Assembly’s Tuesday sitting will also consider the Political Party Funding Bill. Among others, the Bill proposes regulating and making transparent private donations to political parties represented in Parliament and Provincial Legislatures. It is the culmination of extensive public consultations and hearings. A subject for discussion is also on the agenda of Tuesday’s sitting. Ms Connie September, of the African National Congress and Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training, is scheduled to introduce the subject - “a renewed approach towards skills development to ensure opportunities for economic activity”. Motions without Notice, Members’ Statements and Notices of Motion are also scheduled. Two of the 33 scheduled parliamentary committee meetings will be outside Parliament. The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training is conducting an oversight visit on Wednesday to the Cape Peninsular University of Technology’s Cape Town campus. (Please contact Sibo Maputi on 081 052 6060 for more information). The Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements is holding a workshop in Kleinmond on Wednesday and Thursday on proposed legislation and policies. (Please contact Felicia Lombard on 074 580 5503 for more information). At Parliament, almost half of the scheduled committees will consider briefings on strategic, quarterly, annual and performance plans, budgets and programmes of government departments and entities, Seven Bills and a range of public interest issues also feature at scheduled meetings. The Bills scheduled for consideration are the National Forests Amendment Bill, National Health Laboratory Service Amendment Bill, Choice of Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill, Plant Improvement Bill, Plant Breeders’ Rights Bill, Mineral and Petroleum Resources Amendment Bill and the National Research Foundation Bill. Committee meetings scheduled for the week ahead include: This week brings the first parliamentary quarter to a close and Members of Parliament embark on a constituency period from 3 to 16 April. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”.Read more