Parliament, Tuesday, 20 March 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform today received an update from the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform on the status of Rama Communal Property Association (CPA). The Department of Rural Development and Land Reform in 2002 paid R15 million as part of the restitution of land claims and then had handed the land over to Rama CPA for management of the area on behalf of the community. Subsequently, the same land has been sold for R500 000 to Rama HD Investments (Pty) Ltd. The committee is concerned that the Rama CPA as a result of this sale, does not own any land as all the land has been sold and transferred allegedly without consultation and consent of the CPA members. In December 2017, approval was granted for Rama CPA to be placed under administration due to a prima facie case of maladministration and corruption by the department. The Chairperson, Ms Phumuzile Ngwenya-Mabila said: “The department must engage with the Premier of Gauteng, Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality, and law enforcement agencies such as the Special Investigative Unit. The Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform must further engage with the Minister of Police with respect to all cases which were opened at the police station in Rama and which were not attended to.” The issue of Rama CPA could be the tip of the iceberg which the department needs to correct as this has been a long outstanding issue raised by beneficiaries. The committee appeals to the beneficiaries to be patient as the committee is dealing with the issue. The department must submit a progress report on Rama CPA before the next meeting. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM, MS PHUMUZILE NGWENYA-MABILA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2289
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”.Read more