Parliament, Sunday 18 March 2018 – Ending violence against women and girls needs a multi-pronged approach, involving enforcement of laws prohibiting violence, raising public awareness of such laws and constitutional rights and involving men in a concerted campaign to end the violence. This was the message from National Council of Provinces (NCOP) Chairperson Ms Thandi Modise in her address to a Dialogue organised by non-governmental organisation, Ilitha Labantu, in New York on the topic: “Expanding opportunities of rural women and girls to prevent and respond to threats of violence”. Ms Modise is leading Parliament’s delegation to the 62nd Session of the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) in New York. The CSW is focusing specifically on empowerment of rural women and girls. Ms Modise began her address to the discussion by paying tribute to Ms Marielle Franco, a leading human rights and women’s cause activist, shot and killed in Brazil this week. She observed: “Violence against women and girls cuts across ethnicity, race, class, religion, education level and international borders. Statistics on the prevalence of violence vary,” she said, “but the scale is tremendous, the scope is vast, and the consequences for individuals, families, communities, and countries are devastating. “In rural villages, public spaces can pose a serious threat to the safety and well-being of women and girls who live there. Because of this, women’s and girls’ ability to move around their community is restricted in an attempt to keep them ‘safe’. But everyone has the right to live their life without the threat of violence and violence against women and girls is not inevitable. There are many ways to prevent violence in the first place and to stop cycles of violence repeating,” Ms Modise said. Addressing this scourge of violence needed a multi-pronged approach. South Africa’s Constitution, the supreme law of the country, protected women’s rights and the country’s laws and government programmes elaborated on those rights. Despite this, South Africa was still a deeply violent society and violence against women, including rape and domestic violence, remained very high. “We reportedly have one of the highest per capita rates of rape in the world,” remarked Ms Modise. She said Parliament had to intensify its oversight role and also its involvement of the public – including men - in combatting violence and increasing judicial enforcement of laws. South Africa’s National Development Plan, aimed at dramatically unleashing the energies and capabilities of citizens and the state and building an inclusive economy and prosperous society could serve as a guide for acting more decisively against the still high incidence of violence. Parliament’s six-member multiparty delegation, which Ms Modise is leading, includes NCOP House Chairperson Ms Masefako Dikgale and Members of Parliament Ms Nthabiseng Khunou, Ms Grace Tseke, Ms Denise Robinson and Ms Delisile Ngwenya. The delegation is part of the South Africa country delegation to the CSW Session and has also taken part in a number of roundtables and bilateral meetings with fellow parliamentarians. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Anybody over the age of 18 can participate indirectly in Parliament simply by voting in the elections.Read more