Parliament today echoed President Cyril Ramaphosa’s theme of healthy living by officially launching the parliamentary golf club at the Rondebosch golf club in Cape Town. The launch follows requests from various Members and staff for the formalisation of the parliamentary golf club. Member of Parliament and Chairperson of the club, Mr Leonard Ramatlakane, said that this presented itself as the perfect opportunity to not only ensure that Members promote the theme of a healthy lifestyle, as demonstrated by President Cyril Ramaphosa over the past few weeks, but also as a means of raising funds for charity. Asked whether he looks forward to beating Members of the opposition parties during today’s games, Mr Ramatlakane jokingly said: “I am looking forward to giving them a day, but today we are not divided by party lines, today we are colleagues enjoying a friendly game”. Deputy Chairperson of the club, MP Ms Lindiwe Maseko, echoed value of following a healthy lifestyle and said that this is also an opportunity for Parliament to strengthen its relationship with the private sector. The golf club will run a number of events over the course of the next few months, with the aim of raising funds for charities still to be identified. “This is an initiative that is supported by both President Cyril Ramaphosa and Deputy President David Mabuza,” said Ms Maseko. Also in attendance was former Minister of Public Enterprises, Mr Alec Erwin, who expressed his appreciation at having been invited to be part of this parliamentary initiative. Dr Gill Mahlati, Chairman of Bay Hill Capital, who was the main sponsor of today’s event said that this is the year of radical transformation, and Bay Hill Capital will continue to support this great parliamentary initiative. Felicia Lombard 16 March 2018 Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more