Government support for emerging local economic development projects is appreciated, considering the difficult competitive conditions they have to work in, the Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP), Mr Raseriti Tau, told senior government officials after an NCOP delegation was briefed on funding support by the Chief Executive Officer of a local project yesterday. Members of the NCOP are in the Eastern Cape on a Taking Parliament to the People programme report-back visit in the Buffalo City Metro and Alfred Nzo District municipalities. This follows a Taking Parliament to the People programme visit to Buffalo City Metro municipality in November 2016 that considered the state of education and local economic development in both municipalities. Following up on commitments made during the 2016 programme, certain local economic development project sites and schools with challenges were selected for visits this time around. Yesterday, the NCOP went to Macadamia Nut Project, Mngqesha Great Place and 5Up Agricultural Cooperative. In 2016, challenges with government financial support, particularly from the national Department of Trade and Industry and the provincial Department of Economic Development, Environmental Affairs and Tourism were noted. Hearing the news that Macadamia Nut Project received R30 million in financial support from government, Mr Tau said this support should continue. “The financial support the government provides to the projects is appreciated, as it is a remarkable contribution in the advancement of socio-economic transformation,” said Mr Tau. Macadamia Nut Project has over 130 permanent employees from local communities, but the poor condition of the road linking it to markets is hampering progress. Mr Tau urged the project’s managers to use their creativity to fix the road. “I appeal to the leadership to devise means to make the 15 kilometre road on their own. We must begin to take responsibility for little problems, such as this one of the road,” said Mr Tau. Mngqesha Great Place reported that all the problems noted in the 2016 Taking Parliament to the People programme remain in place. It was agreed that the MECs of all the Eastern Cape provincial government departments involved in cooperative government, business and economic development should meet to discuss appropriate government support for local economic development projects in the Eastern Cape. No progress was reported at 5Up Agricultural Cooperative at Dimbaza, except for the erection of a new fence. 5Up Agricultural Project leader Mr Thozamile Landingwe said the fence provided by Buffalo City Metro Municipality has prevented theft. “Before when there was no fenced yard here, our material was vulnerable to theft, but after the fence was installed, there is some security now and we appreciated the municipality for that,” said Mr Landingwe. Members of the NCOP heard that 5 Up Agricultural Project enjoys the support of a hydroponics specialist, who has already offered hydroponics training to the value of R25 000 free of charge. Site visits continue today. Mava Lukani
	14 March 2018 The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed.Read more