Parliament, Saturday, 3 March 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Health welcomes the intervention instituted by the North West Premier, towards the Provincial Department of Health. North West Premier Mr Supra Mahumapelo set up a forensic investigation in the Provincial Department of Health to deal with allegations raised by the members of the public about the department. The forensic investigation follows reports that the North West Department of Health allegedly paid Mediosa (a Gupta linked company) R30m upfront and made a further R180m for a purchase of a mobile clinic. The Committee is of the view that the walkabout conducted by the Minister in the North West to inspect the mobile clinic was a necessary intervention. Chairperson for the Committee Ms Lindelwa Dunjwa said, “It is good when Minister is seen to be in the front line when there are reports of alleged corruption taking place within the department.” “I would like to commend the Minister on the stance he has taken regarding Mediosa mobile clinics,” added Ms Dunjwa. “We welcome the decision to put the head of department on special leave whilst the investigation is ongoing. This will ensure that as the administrator of the department he does not interfere or influence the investigation,” she added. “Government cannot be seen to be taking a back seat when there are allegations of maladministration and a clear contravention of the Public Financial Management Act, we hope the investigation will bear fruits, said Ms Dunjwa.” The Committee restates the view that private mobile clinics and emergency medical services are unnecessary for the department as this is a service and competency that government can provide. Ms Dunjwa said, “I am shocked and disappointed by the reaction of the Premier towards the Minister’s visit in the North West.” The Committee will invite the North West and the Free State Department of Health to appear before the Committee to account about the issues in the public domain. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE OF HEALTH, MS LINDELWA DUNJWA For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa LanduParliamentary Communication ServicesTel: 021 403 8203Cell: 081 497 4694E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more