Parliament, Tuesday, 20 March 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs has accepted the responses given by the Board of the South African Weather Services (SAWS) on allegations that were levelled against the board by an anonymous source on the appointment of Ms Julia Mphafudi, the Executive of Corporate and Regulatory Services. The Chairperson of the Committee, Mr Philemon Mapulane said: “From the responses of the board, it looks like there is nothing untoward in the appointment of Ms Mphafudi.” The committee has, however, requested the SAWS Board to make available to Parliament the psychometric results of the candidates who applied for the position currently held by Ms Mphafudi and the salary scales of the management of SAWS. The committee has also raised concerns about the fact that the chief executive officer (CEO) of SAWS, Mr Jerry Legoasa, seems to be on the firing line of the board. This is worrying as it is one of the allegations contained in the anonymous tip-off the committee received. The committee has urged the board to put first the interest and stability of the board in engaging on a matter regarding the CEO. “As the portfolio committee we have full confidence in the CEO. We are impressed with his understanding of the sector,” said Mr Mapulane. The committee has also agreed to grant the request of the Minister of Environmental Affairs, Ms Edna Molewa, and amend Clauses 10 and 11 of the Marine Spatial Planning Bill by removing Sub-Clause 5 of both clauses. The sub-clause speaks to a decision of the majority, which is not applicable to the Ministerial and Director-General Committees as decisions are made by consensus at both committees. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS, MR PHILEMON MAPULANE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed.Read more