Parliament, Sunday 25 March 2018 – National Assembly Speaker Ms Baleka Mbete is leading a multiparty delegation of nine Members of Parliament (MPs) to the largest global gathering of Parliaments, the 138th Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) Assembly and Related Meetings. The meeting, from 24 to 28 March in Geneva, Switzerland, brings together parliamentarians from more than 137 countries, representing about 6.5 billion people, to discuss a wide range of topics. These include strengthening parliamentary contribution to a global compact for migration, maintaining peace as a vehicle for achieving sustainable development, addressing under-representation of women in politics and engaging the private sector in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDs), especially those on renewable energy. The South African Parliament has proposed amendments to a draft resolution about engaging the private sector in implementing SDGS on renewable energy. The proposed amendments include emphasis on development, dissemination and transfer of environmentally sound technologies to developing countries on favourable and mutually agreed terms and increasing women’s participation in energy policies and programmes. The Assembly’s General Debate from 25 to 27 March will focus on: “Strengthening the global regime for migrants and refugees - the need for evidence-based policy solutions”. During this time, debates on several other topics will also happen in committees. These include the Standing Committee on Sustainable Development, Finance and Trade; the Standing Committee on Peace and International Security; the Standing Committee on United Nations Affairs; the Standing Committee on Democracy and Human Rights; the Forum on Women Parliamentarians and the Forum on Young Parliamentarians. On 27 March, the Assembly will adopt a resolution on an agreed emergency item and conclude its General Debate. On 28 March, the last day of the Assembly, resolutions, reports of Standing Committees and an outcome document of the General Debate will be adopted. The delegation of MPs which Ms Mbete is leading comprises: Mr R Tau (Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces), Ms M Boroto (National Assembly House Chairperson International Relations), Mr JP Mnguni , Ms P Mabe, Mr SJ Mohai (Chief Whip of the National Council of Provinces), Mr M Waters, Mr M de Freitas, Mr N Paulsen and Mr M Hlengwa. The IPU has been in existence since 1889 and currently has 178 national Parliaments as members and another 12 associate members. Associate members are international groups of Parliaments, such as the European Parliament. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed.Read more