Parliament, Monday, 26 March 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Police has noted with serious concern the latest cash-in-transit robbery near Acornhoek/Hoedspruit in Limpopo, which took place on Saturday. Two guards were injured in the incident. The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman, said that the frequent occurrence of cash-in-transit heists was raised at the last two portfolio committee meetings with the National Commissioner of Police, General Khehla Sitole. At these meetings the committee urged the South African Police Service (Saps) to give special attention to the evolving crime trend. The Commissioner assured the committee that the matter will be attended to. Mr Beukman emphasised the committee is seriously concerned that large organised crime syndicates with automatic weapons operate frequently in several provinces, targeting cash-in-transit vehicles. The committee is of the view that crime intelligence and detection operations should be increased and the relevant specialised units should be tasked to deal with the current crime trend. The detection of the crime syndicates should be the major focus of Saps to ensure that economic activity is not hampered by frequent cash heists. Close cooperation between Saps and the relevant private security companies is also needed to ensure that risk factors such as internal collusion between staff and syndicates is dealt with head-on. “The cash-in-transit robberies are executed with military-style precision and Saps needs to adapt strategies to be one step ahead of the syndicates. The use of technology should also be increased as a force multiplier to deal with the current frequency of cash heists,” Mr Beukman emphasised. The committee will during the budget hearings in April further probe Saps management on steps taken to deal with the matter. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mr Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party.Read more