Parliament, Thursday, 15 March 2018 – The NCOP delegation left with mixed feelings following a visit to a number of schools in the Alfred Nzo District Municipality, as part of an inspection visit and report back following the Taking of Parliament to the People (TPTTP) undertaken in 2016. The NCOP members visited Makaula Secondary School, Justice Sodladla Pre School, Vuyani Pre School and Zingisani Pre School, that are in the Umzimvubu Local Municipality. The NCOP delegation led by Mr Mntomhle Khawula received a mixed bag of responses and made some observations when it inspected service delivery sites to assess progress made on challenges identified in the 2016 TPTTP campaign in the area. Some of the NCOP recommendations were implemented or are being attended to with clear timelines for implementation, while in other instances there was no movement. Some of the appreciated development include progress made in addressing water and sanitation challenges although more work should still be done. “We could see in some areas that certain departments made follow-ups and delivered on their commitments” said Mr Khawula. Briefing the NCOP delegation, the Speaker of the uMzimvubu Local Municipality, Mr Sobane Mnukwa, said more work will be done to address the poor infrastructure of some Early Childhood Development Centres visited, and to ensure that their water and sanitation as well as poor roads. Mr Khawula said: “We are particularly satisfied with the progress made at MaKaula Secondary School, one of the best performing boarding schools in the province of the Eastern Cape. When we visited the school in 2016, some staff positions were vacant but now they have been filled. That is promising. It shows that the Department of Education has delivered.” He said: “when we came in 2016, we recommended that a hostel should be built for this boarding school. Although there are delays we appreciate the given project timelines with all role players taken on board. Key to these projects is the coordination of various role players.” The NCOP delegation heard that water shortages in various municipalities are hampering the development of among others the construction of the required MaKaula hostel. The delegation instructed the municipality to step up its intervention to get the water supply challenges resolved, as well as matters of drug abuse by youths. The delegation was very concerned about lack of progress in investigating allegations that a female ambulance driver was involved in paddling drugs to school children. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF ONE OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE DELEGATION, MR MNTOMHLE KHAWULA. For media enquiries or interviews with Mr Khawula, kindly contact: Abel Mputing
	Cell: 082 224 7477   A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa.Read more