Parliament, Tuesday 20 March 2018 - Parliament joins South Africans in commemorating Human Rights Day. This is the day to pay homage to all those who lost their lives when police opened fire on a group of peaceful protestors in Sharpeville on 21 March 1960. The group was protesting against apartheid pass laws. This day marked an affirmation by ordinary people, rising in unison to proclaim their rights and became an iconic date in our country’s history that today is commemorated as Human Rights Day. The Bill of Rights which is found in Chapter 2 of our Constitution is the cornerstone of our constitutional and representative democracy. Parliament is guided by the values and principles of the Constitution in executing its mandate as a law-making body. As a representative of the people of South Africa, Parliament recommits to protect, without fear or favour, people’s democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom. This year’s Human Rights coincides with the year-long commemoration of Mandela’s centenary under the theme “Making your future work better, Learning from Madiba.” In his 1996 speech on Human Rights Day Mandela said “Our drive for human dignity and basic rights is premised on the development of our country and the improvement of the living conditions of the people. The freedoms whose virtue we are extolling will be meaningless in the face of grinding poverty and underdevelopment.” A reiteration that democracy and human rights are inseparable and that human rights are meaningless if they cannot change the lives of ordinary citizens. This position is the thrust of the appointment of the High-Level Panel on the Assessment of Key Legislation and the Acceleration of Fundamental Change by the Speakers' Forum, as well as its over 100 recommendations made for the legislative sector to work on. Parliament thus seeks to build on the progress made since the advent of freedom and democracy and to accelerate the programme towards the realisation of the basic human rights to change the quality of life of all South Africans. On this important commemorative day, Parliament urges all South Africans to reflect, recommit, advance, protect, defend and uphold democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”.Read more