Parliament, Monday 26 March 2018 – The largest world platform for Parliaments will be considering adopting a declaration on former President Nelson Mandela at its 139th Assembly in October. This follows representations during the 138th IPU Assembly and Related Meetings, now underway in Switzerland, from the South African Parliament about 2018 being the centenary of Madiba. National Assembly Speaker Ms Baleka Mbete is leading a delegation of nine Members of Parliament (MPs) to the current 138th Assembly and Related Meetings of the IPU. The nine MPs are Mr Raseriti Tau (Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces), Ms Mmatlala Boroto (National Assembly House Chairperson International Relations), Mr Pumzile Mnguni, Ms Peace Mabe, Mr Seiso Mohai (Chief Whip of the National Council of Provinces), Mr Michael Waters (Deputy Chief Whip of the Democratic Alliance), Mr Manny de Freitas, Mr Nazier Paulsen and Mr Mkhuleko Hlengwa. Ms Mbete, who has met with IPU President Ms Gabriela Cuevas Barron, will be speaking in the General Debate of the IPU Assembly tomorrow morning. The General Debate is on: “Strengthening the global regime for migrants and refugees - the need for evidence-based policy solutions”. In addition, the Assembly will debate a draft resolution on the emergency item: “The consequences of the US declaration on Jerusalem in the light of the UN Charter and resolutions”. Palestine, Kuwait, Bahrain and Turkey proposed this emergency item. Parliament’s delegation has been participating in many other meetings, including the IPU Governing Council (Ms Mbete, Ms Boroto and Mr Waters), the Standing Committee on Peace and International Security (Mr Tau, Mr Mohai, Mr Paulsen and Mr Mnguni), the Standing Committee on Peace and Sustainable Development (Mr De Freitas, Ms Mabe and Mr Hlengwa), the Forum of Young Parliamentarians and the Forum of Women Parliamentarians. The South African Parliament’s delegation also proposed amendments to draft resolutions, such as one about engaging the private sector in implementing Sustainable Development Goals, especially on renewable energy. The amendments include emphasis on development, dissemination and transfer of environmentally sound technologies to developing countries on favourable and mutually agreed terms and increasing women’s participation in energy policies and programmes. On 27 March, the Assembly will adopt a resolution on the agreed emergency item and conclude its General Debate. On 28 March, the last day of the Assembly, resolutions, reports of Standing Committees and an outcome document of the General Debate will be adopted. The IPU has been in existence since 1889 and currently has 178 national Parliaments as members and another 12 associate members. Associate members are international groups of Parliaments, such as the European Parliament. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them.Read more