Parliament, Thursday, 1 March 2018  Parliaments Multi-Party Womens Caucus (MPWC) has urged all government departments to ensure gender-sensitive budgeting taking the needs of women in South Africa into account. Committee Chairperson, Ms Masefele Story Morutoa, urged a meeting of the MPWC that as Departments will be presenting their annual performance plans (APPs) and budgets for THE 2018/19 financial year, Members of Parliament should be vigilant when they are scrutinising these APPs and budgets, to ensure that the issue of gender equality is pushed through. “We are relying on you as our eyes and ears on the various Portfolio Committees, including the Select Committees in the National Council of Provinces, said Ms Morutoa. The MPWC today received a briefing from the Ministry of Women in the Presidency on progress on the implementation of the South African Integrated Programme of Action Addressing Violence Against Women and Children (2013  2018). The MPWC heard of various campaigns introduced by government to address violence against women and children. This includes the #365 Days campaign where the 16 Days of Activism Campaign was extended to an all year round campaign. This was aimed to ensure sustained interventions to raise awareness and ensure more effective activism. #CountMeIn, a social media tool for mass mobilisation of communities to promote collective responsibility was also started to eradicate violence against women and children. National dialogues have already taken place in four provinces, with the latest one happening in North West. Ms Morutoa said the key to addressing challenges that women face daily, is to prioritise a gender-sensitive budgeting, change the indicators regarding targets on women matters and for all, irrespective of political affiliation, to stand together to address violence against women and children. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE MULTI-PARTY WOMENS CAUCUS, MS MASEFELE STORY MORUTOA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committees Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”.Read more