Parliament, Thursday, 15 March 2018 – A delegation of Permanent Members of the National Council of Provinces and Members of Eastern Cape Provincial Legislature is disappointed that no action was taken to remedy challenges identified at Mowa Primary School in the Alfred Nzo District Municipality of the Eastern Cape. The NCOP made clear recommendations during its visit to the area in 2016 for the Department of Basic Education, from national to local level, to ensure that plans are put in place to build adequate ablution facilities, and for a budget to be made available to equip the school with adequate furniture and stationery. The NCOP delegation described as unsatisfactory the fact that in two years none of the recommendations have been implemented to the detriment of learners at the school, the majority of whom are poor. The leader of the NCOP delegation, Mr Eddie Makue said: “the delegation has instructed the Department of Basic Education through its Director-General to provide the NCOP with an explanation on why the recommendations had not been implemented, which official was responsible for this dereliction of duty, and what consequences will they face for not implementing these recommendations intended to better the lives of children at that school. The DG has been given a two-week deadline to provide the NCOP with an explanation.” The delegation also inspected the Masakhane Early Child Development Centre (ECDC), where good progress was made in implementing the recommendations of the NCOP. Members of the delegation were appreciative of increased funding from the conditional grant of the Department of Social Development that has enabled the centre to admit more learners. The support model of the early childhood development centre has been replicated across the province of the Eastern Cape and benefiting many children who are now exposed to early development initiatives. Despite this, the delegation has encouraged the department to meet the national norms and standards of funding ECDCs which cover 264 days of the year instead of the current model of covering 209 days. At the Imitha Yelanga ECD Centre, the delegation was concerned about the substandard workmanship in building the centre. The centre is relatively new but has large cracks that were caused by a storm, putting the lives of the children at the centre in danger. “The Committee requested the Department of Public Works to provide, within two weeks, a report from the inspector that approved and the contractor that built the structure, as well as outline measures it intends to take to rectify the defects,” Mr Makue emphasised. The delegation was steadfast that ultimately, as a representative structure of the public, Parliament is concerned with creating an environment that is conducive enough for quality teaching and learning. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE LEADER OF DELEGATION, MR EDDIE MAKUE For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote.Read more