Parliament, Wednesday, 14 March 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Tourism today received a briefing from the National Department of Tourism on the assessment done by the Governmental Technical Advisory Centre (GTAC) on the Working for Tourism programme. The assessment was commissioned by the department in response to a forensic report on projects. The department responded on 31 out of 32 projects, providing reasons where it differed with the report. Some projects had stalled due to funding and implementer-induced challenges, observed by the committee when it conducted oversight. The acting committee Chairperson, Ms Lusizo Makhubela-Mashele, said: “We were very concerned when we conducted oversight in various provinces. We saw first-hand incomplete projects and advised the department to provide the committee with a full report on the way forward for the funded projects. We needed to know exactly how much money was spent on each project and the feasibility of continuing with such projects.” We would have liked to see GTAC recommend public private partnerships to take over such projects, in order for investment to occur and the projects to be completed. Whilst some projects have been found to be unfeasible to continue with, the committee is satisfied that alternative site use in collaboration with local authorities will be reached. The department is urged to conduct comprehensive feasible studies on projects at conceptualisation stage in order to derive value for money for public funds. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, MS LUSIZO MAKHUBELA-MASHELE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 4032289
	Cell: 0817041109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more