Parliament, Thursday, 15 March 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training has condemned the vandalism caused by students protesting at the University of Venda and other campuses. The Chairperson of the Committee, Ms Connie September, said it is of concern to the committee when the education of the poor students takes a knock from unfortunate and irresponsible actions. “The university management at UniVen has made a commitment that classes will resume next week and the committee welcomes this promise. We want to see the students in class, learning and gaining valuable skills and knowledge,” Ms September said. “The committee condemns destruction of property and vandalism that has taken place as a result of students’ unhappiness with management. Students should learn to always raise their issues in an orderly manner that respects property and other people,” she said. The University of Venda students have been rioting since last week following delayed allocations from the National Student Financial Aid Scheme. Ms September said it was the students’ responsibility to make sure that they attain education once they have been admitted to universities. First time applicants are benefitting from the free education policy being implemented by government, starting this year. “The economy needs these young people, and they should not do things that will have them remain in the system longer than the planned duration of studies. Vandalism at the institutions is unfortunate, as future generation will suffer the consequences,” she said. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSON, MS CONNIE SEPTEMBER For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)Parliamentary Communication ServicesTel: 021 403 8041Cell: 081 052 6060E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Anybody over the age of 18 can participate indirectly in Parliament simply by voting in the elections.Read more