Parliament, Wednesday, 6 March 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services today adopted the Traditional Courts Bill, thereby creating a uniform legislative framework regulating the roles and functions of traditional courts in the resolution of certain disputes, in accordance with constitutional imperatives and values. Committee Chairperson, Ms Madipoane Mothapo, said this Bill will greatly assist rural and traditional communities. “The committee is cognisant of the fact that although traditional courts already form an integral part of the delivery of justice in our country, it is a constitutional imperative that they be transformed to suit the new constitutional dispensation. At present, these courts are still governed by the Black Administration Act of 1927. This is completely unacceptable.” The committee heard that communities living under traditional leadership will all be included under this Bill. If anyone is unhappy with the process followed or the outcome and has a concern and exhausted the hierarchy of the traditional system, he or she can appeal to a magistrate’s court. The Bill further makes provision for gender representation. The committee heard the current version of the Bill has the support of the National House of Traditional Leaders and Congress of Traditional Leaders of South Africa. Ms Mothapo said the Bill further intends to increase access to justice services by enhancing the effectiveness, efficiency and integrity of traditional courts for the purpose of resolving disputes. She said the essence of the Bill can be aligned with the National Development Plan’s vision of realising a developmental and capable state as well as broadening social cohesion. The Bill was accepted and adopted by the majority of members of the committee, seven. Members of the Democratic Alliance indicated that they will not support the Bill as the opting out clause does not appear in the Bill. They left the meeting immediately after making their position known and before the committee could vote on the Bill. The Bill is likely to be debated next week in the National Assembly. As it is a section 76 Bill, it must also be referred to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP). Due to the programme and time constraints of this Parliament, the process in the NCOP is likely to happen in the next Parliament, said Ms Mothapo. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, MS MADIPOANE MOTHAPO. For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more