Parliament, Friday, 28 September 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Police has noted with huge concern and disappointment the Audit Report of the South African Police Service (SAPS) which indicates that the police service has received a second qualified audit opinion from the Auditor-General (AG), two years in a row. The report was tabled in Parliament on Thursday. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Francois Beukman, said the qualified audit opinion raised serious concerns with regard to the financial, procurement and contract management capabilities within the senior management of the police service. Mr Beukman said the Minister and National Commissioner of Police need to shake up their management team to bring the requisite skills with regard to the areas highlighted by the AG, in order to strengthen the internal control mechanisms. “It is quite clear that new blood is needed to turn the ship around. The suspension of the current Chief Financial Officer and the debacle with regard to the State Information Technology Agency and Forensic Data Analyst contracts indeed do not bode well for the general effectiveness and performance of the police department, going forward,” said Mr Beukman. He emphasised that drastic measures are needed to ensure that an unqualified audit is achieved in the current financial year. The committee is of the view that the understated irregular expenditure of R968 million is an indication that the Minister of Police must ensure that strict corporate and contract governance is restored within the SAPS environment. Mr Beukman said the AG has highlighted the lack of proper financial controls and consequence management as the root causes of the current situation. The committee maintains that the implementation of the National Development Plan recommendations about the National Police Board and a merit-based appointment process for the top management of SAPS is the only long-term solution for dealing comprehensively with the challenges. The management of the police service will appear before the committee on Tuesday, 9 October 2018 about the AG’s report, in which the Audit Committee of SAPS will also be invited to attend. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact committee’s media officer: Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more