Parliament, Friday, 14 September 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Basic Education has noted with great sadness the death of an educator yesterday at a school in Zeerust in the North West, allegedly at the hands of a learner.
	
	Committee Chairperson, Ms Nomalungelo Gina, said this incident reinforced the need for greater safety and security measures at all schools. “The committee is deeply shocked by the incident. Weapons should never find their way into schools. This should be a safe environment for both learners and educators.”
	
	It was reported that the matter occurred after an incident on Wednesday between the two. The boy was apparently in a queue for food and was reprimanded by the teacher. He took it personally and went home only to return the next day to allegedly stab the teacher in the classroom.
	
	Ms Gina said: “The committee would like to express its condolences to the family and friends of the deceased educator. Our thoughts are with you during this difficult time.”
	
	Ms Gina further expressed her shocked at reports of an unrelated incident in which a learner from Eldorado Park Secondary School was arrested on Thursday after he allegedly pulled a gun on his teacher. It was later established it was a toy gun. It was reported that the educator reprimanded the learner on Tuesday and Wednesday for wearing a beanie to school. On Thursday the 15-year-old boy allegedly pulled the gun, that shoots pellets, on the educator.
	
	“I cannot emphasise enough that schools are places of safety. Education is a societal issue. It is important for everyone to work together to ensure a safe place for learners to be educating in and for teachers to do their job.
	
	“I want to appeal to parents and the community at large to help bring back the pride and safety back into our schools. Violence does not belong in schools,” said Ms Gina. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS NOMALUNGELO GINA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote.Read more