Parliament, Tuesday, 11 September 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs is concerned by the inadequate response by the South African Police Service (SAPS) and Tshwane Metro Police in relation to the security challenges around the Desmond Tutu Refugee Reception Office. The committee recently visited the office and highlighted its concerns around the rampant security challenges around the centre in Marabastad. The committee today received a report from both the SAPS and Tshwane Metro Police that it felt lacked detail and was untruthful. “The committee took exception to the lack of depth in the report and has instructed that all stakeholders meet and draft a detailed plan to the committee on how they intend to deal with the challenges by 9 October 2018,” said Mr Hlomani Chauke, the Chairperson of the committee. The plan is that the stakeholders must come up with clear timelines on when they intend to implement initiatives to deal with the challenges. This plan must include the integration of technology such as cameras to monitor the situation around the office that will enable a quicker response. Furthermore, the department has been directed to engage the South African Human Rights Commission to plan and implement educational programmes for SAPS and Tshwane Metro Police on policing issues around asylum and immigration to enable and foster effective policing. The committee has also directed that the plans that will be presented to the committee must be signed off by the political leadership of the various stakeholders. This will enable the committee to hold the Executive accountable on the implementation of the plan. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, MR HLOMANI CHAUKE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”.Read more