Parliament, Thursday, 20 September 2018 – The Joint Constitutional Review Committee (CRC) resolved today to further consider allowing for additional oral presentations following the 120 names emanating from the written submissions. At the same time the committee has requested both the Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces to consider extending the deadline for the committee reporting back to Parliament. The Co-Chairperson of the committee, Mr Lewis Nzimande, said the committee held a week of oral submissions at Parliament earlier this month at which 42 presentations were made. The list of 120 names includes the oral presentations that the committee already heard. “At the end of that week of the oral presentations, the committee made it clear that it is not the end of the process as not all the written submissions had been worked through. We then stated that should we find more written submissions with request for oral presentations, we will consider it. We will now ascertain who of these submitters are still interested in appearing before the committee on the basis of substance of the submission.” The committee also received a presentation on the draft report on the public hearings that were held in all the nine provinces. The committee further noted the report of the service provider on the written submissions but resolved that the report now becomes a parliamentary document and should thus be presented by the administration which appointed the service provider. Next week committee members will be given an opportunity to scrutinise the volumes of written submissions before it reconvenes early in October 2018. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CO-CHAIRPERSON OF THE JOINT CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE, MR LEWIS NZIMANDE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly.Read more