Parliament, Friday, 7 September 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training today welcomed the announcement that the Media, Information and Communication Technologies Sector Education and Training Authority (MICT-SETA) be investigated for maladministration. President Cyril Ramaphosa issued a proclamation today (7 Friday 2018) that a number of government departments and entities be investigated by the Special Investigating Unit. It is frustrating when officials reduce the Sector Education and Training Authorities (Seta’s) intervention to line their pockets. Deviation from the noble intention the Setas were founded for is the worst form of betrayal to government’s commitment to skills and job creation among poor youth. The committee calls on the Department of Higher Education and Training to strengthen its oversight role as it relates to addressing financial abuses as well as appointing vigilant boards. The Chairperson of the committee Ms Connie September said the SIU should move with speed on President’s call, and soon after, those responsible for stealing government money should face the full might of the law. Good governance of the Setas, colleges, and universities is non-negotiable. The sector must lead and be an example upon which all sectors model their management and administration. The Media, Information and Communication Technologies Sector Education and Training Authority (MICT SETA) is among entities to be investigated for alleged maladministration in relation to the allocation of discretionary grant funding. The proclamation stipulates that the SIU probe any undisclosed or unauthorised interests which officials or employees of the MICT SETA may have, and the extent to which officials may have derived benefit. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING, MS CONNIE SEPTEMBER. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”.Read more