Parliament, Thursday, 27 September 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Tourism welcomes the reforms made to visa requirements, which will make travelling to South Africa a lot less complicated, as tourism is a key player to job creation and boosting the economy. The travel reforms will include amendments to regulations applying to foreign minors travelling into South Africa, visa waivers and relaxation of visa requirements for certain countries. The committee notes that clarity is required on the implementation of the new amendments for minors travelling in or out of South Africa, as Section 18(3)(c) of the Children’s Act requires consent of both parents. The Minister makes mention of documentation, but did not clearly indicate what this is or the implications of carrying “such documentation”. Airlines, inbound tour operators and people travelling with minors need this clarity as people outside of South Africa are, at this time of the year, finalising their travel arrangements for the holiday season. The tourism portfolio committee calls for clarity, as the Minister mentioned that, “officials will only insist on documentation by exception, for instance high-risk situations.” This may still deter people from travelling to South Africa, if clarity is not provided on what these conditions entail. The committee welcomes the waiver of visas to 15 of the Southern African Development Community countries, with the exception of the Democratic Republic of Congo. The Chairperson of the portfolio committee, Ms Lusizo Makhubele-Mashele, urged to Department of Home Affairs to speedily conclude negotiations to finalise visa waiver agreements for ordinary passport holders, as indicated by the Minister. The introduction of the e-Visa in New Zealand next year will be closely monitored, as it is hoped that this system will be replicated in other countries making travel to South Africa seamless and uncomplicated. It is hoped that the pilot e-Gates at South Africa’s busiest airports will reduce the queuing time for returning travellers to go through immigration. Ms Makhubele-Mashele said: “We need to use technology to improve efficiencies at airports and other points of entry into our country and to improve traveller experience overall. Once a tourist is frustrated at the point of entry then that has the potential to spoil the entire tourist experience. We therefore welcome the amendments and new developments Home Affairs is putting in place and call on the Department of Tourism to work closely with Home Affairs.” The Department of Home Affairs is urged to make its implementation plan public so that all people are aware of the changes. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, MS LUSIZO SHARON MAKHUBELE-MASHELE For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2289
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them.Read more