Parliament, Tuesday, 4 September 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Energy has welcomed the publishing of the Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) which has been available for public comment since the 27th of August. The Minister of Energy, Mr Jeff Radebe, briefed the committee on the Integrated Resource Plan on Tuesday. He told the members that the plan has been published for public comment for 60 days. The committee welcomed the announcement of the IRP and said this will give policy certainty to the country. The committee Chairperson, Mr Fikile Majola, said: “We appreciate draft report on the IRP, the committee will hold the department accountable on the things it said it will do.” Mr Majola said the public has been calling for the committee to conduct public hearings on the nuclear build programme but in light of the updated IRP which does not include additional nuclear, the committee will undertake a public consultation process on the updated IRP. On Grand Inga Project, this is the one project that is not within the hands of the South African government. Mr Majola asked what is happening with the project and if it is guaranteed to succeed. Responding Minister Radebe said Grand Inga is a good project for the African continent. He indicated that there is a person in charge who was the former minister of energy in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the appointment is to ensure the implementation of the project. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, MR FIKILE MAJOLA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa LanduParliamentary Communication ServicesTel: 021 403 8203Cell: 081 497 4694E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more