Parliament, Sunday, 23 September 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs would like to extend its sincere condolences to the family of Minister of Environmental Affairs, Ms Edna Molewa on her passing away. The committee is saddened by the passing of the Minister as she has played a significant role in environmental affairs both internationally and domestically. She has also contributed immensely in ensuring that South Africa is on par with other nations on matters that affect the sustainable use of the environment. Minister Molewa made significant contributions in international multi-lateral platforms on issues concerning the conservation of the environment. She played a pivotal role in the adoption of a historic climate change agreement in 2015 known as the Paris Agreement. The chairperson of the committee, Mr Phillemon Mapulane describes Minister Molewa as an outstanding ambassador for environmental activism and sustainable development both internationally and domestically. “Minister Molewa made significant contributions in global multi-lateral platforms especially on global efforts that seek to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. She played a key role in South Africa hosting a successful 17th meeting of the Conference of the Parties (CoP) to Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) in Johannesburg that took place from 24 September to 5 October 2016”, said Mr Mapulane. The committee commends the sterling role she played and her stewardship that led to the decrease in the numbers of rhinos being killed in South Africa three years in a row. This is a testament to Minister Edna Molewa’s experience and skills within the sector. The committee wishes her family, friends, colleagues and acquaintances strength at this time. The country is indeed poorer without her. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS, MR PHILEMON MAPULANE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Faith Ndenze (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: (021) 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly.Read more