Parliament, Tuesday, 4 September 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs has decided to summon the Minister of Environmental Affairs, Ms Edna Molewa, to appear before it on Tuesday, 11 September 2018, after having been disappointed by the Minister’s letter to the Speaker of the National Assembly to request for the postponement of the second reading of the National Environmental Management Laws Amendment (NEMLA) Bill scheduled for debate this afternoon. The committee was unanimous in its condemnation of the unfortunate actions of the Minister to withdraw the Bill on the eleventh hour before its consideration by the National Assembly this afternoon, especially in view of the fact that the Bill was adopted by the committee more than two months ago, on the 19th of June 2018. The Minister had all the time to raise her reservations with the committee instead of waiting for the last minute. The committee found the Minister’s late intervention not to be in accordance with the decorum of Parliament, especially as the letter of her request to postpone the debate on the NEMLA Bill was brought to the attention of the Chairperson only yesterday, with many Members of Parliament having to spend their entire weekend preparing for the debate today. The committee was further frustrated by yet another letter addressed to the committee by the Minister, requesting for the postponement of a scheduled meeting agenda for today on “Briefing by the Department of Environmental Affairs on the understanding of the rhino horn demand management and preparations for CITES” (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora). The Chairperson of the committee felt the issues she cited as the reasons for the postponement were not the initial reasons, but rather that the responsible Deputy Director-General would be out of the country. It was only when the committee asked for the presentation to go ahead, as the DDG works with a team, that the Minister chose to advance other reasons, mainly that it is too early to present on the CITES preparation, among other things. Besides, the committee felt that the Minister could still have presented her reasons during the parliamentary briefing on the matter, rather than electing to account to the committee through letters, something which is totally unacceptable. Based on all the above frustrations, the committee unanimously resolved to summon the Minister to appear before it to clarify the above issues. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS, MR PHILEMON MAPULANE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Faith Ndenze (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: (021) 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more