Parliament, Wednesday, 5 September 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Social Development still stands by its own report on assessing the progress done by the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) and the South African Post Office (Sapo) in its transformation process that is moving beneficiaries from Sassa CPS cards to Sassa Post Office cards before the end of September. The committee wants to distance itself from reports in the media that allege that there is a planning for corruption process in relation to the beneficiaries that have not yet received the Sassa Sapo cards. Therefore, the allegations of planning corruption are far-fetched and baseless. The committee is also happy with the conduct of Sassa officials from senior management to lower levels of officials. The committee has also received good testimonies from beneficiaries that the CEO of Sassa has been available to assist whenever he is contacted on the grants process. The committee is also happy that the Post Office is quickly adapting to its new role and now it has even chairs for the frail and aged beneficiaries. The committee wants to also encourage Sassa and Sapo employees to provide a service that seeks to promote the dignity of the beneficiaries. The committee also wants to assure the beneficiaries and those who are still in the process of applying that Social Development is committed to working with them and solving their challenges. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT, MS ZOLEKA CAPA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more