Parliament, Sunday, 02 September 2018 –The Portfolio Committee on Police has welcomed the announcement by the Head of the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (DPCI), Lieutenant-General Godfrey Lebeya, to appoint a team which will fast-track investigations with regards to the allegations of state capture. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Francois Beukman, said that the pro-active steps taken by Lieutenant-General Lebeya is necessary and appropriate. "The DPCI should be at the forefront in dealing with organized commercial crime and serious economic crime investigations. Key in this endeavour would be to strengthen the Commercial Crime Division of the DPCI in terms of leadership and critical skills," said Mr Beukman. Mr Beukman further said that the DPCI needs the necessary resources and expertise to deal effectively with current high profile commercial crime and corruption cases. The committee has noted the announcement by Lieutenant-General Lebeya with regard to the suspension of Major-General Zinhle Mnonopi after revelations at the Zondo Commission of Enquiry. The committee will await the outcome of the relevant processes. Mr Beukman highlighted the important role of the office of the DPCI Judge to deal with serious complaints against members of the Hawks, in which he pointed out that members of the public that had their rights negatively affected by illegal conduct or improper investigation by members of the DPCI should, without delay, furnish a complaint with the Judge. "The Office of the DPCI Judge is a crucial oversight institution in the criminal justice system,” said Mr Beukman. The committee will this week invite Judge Frans Kgomo to Parliament to brief the committee on the current status of the complaints received by his office and the processing of investigations. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact committee’s media officer: Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns.Read more