Parliament, Friday, 27 April 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Transport has called on the Rail Safety Regulator (RSR) to speedily determine how the frequent and high-counting accidents involving trains and vehicles could be put to a stop. The Chairperson of the Committee Ms Dikeledi Magadzi said the committee is saddened by the Blackheath train-bakkie accident and sends its heartfelt condolences to the families of those who have lost lives. “To have lost so many lives of South African workers is disheartening, almost to a similar incident that involved unsuspecting school children some years ago. Agencies within the Department of Transport must move to ensure that such a similar accident does not reoccur” Ms Magadzi said. “This accident speaks to the need to urgently address the maintenance of rail systems especially in the Western Cape, but also generally throughout the country. Our systems are collapsing and putting at risk so many lives,” she added. A bakkie collided with a train this morning at the same level-crossing where a similar accident occurred and where 10 school children died in 2010. “Today seven people have also lost their lives, this calls for action. Two accidents on similar circumstances taking so many lives necessitate action.” “The RSR should thoroughly investigate the circumstances of this kind of carnage exactly in the same spot, only a few years apart,” she said. Ms Magadzi said the new interim board of Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa should do something in improving rail transport and get a world standard everyone desires and what could be done to avert this kind of accidents. “Communities also need to be vigilant as they cross railways, obey the rules and satisfy themselves that there are no oncoming trains,” emphasised Ms Magazi. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, MS DIKELEDI MAGADZI. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament.Read more