Parliament, Sunday 8 April 2018 - The Speakers’ Forum meeting, held from 5 to 6 April 2018 in Pretoria, recommitted to advance the work and mandate of the Legislative Sector for effective oversight and coordination. The Speakers’ Forum is a body that oversees coordination of Legislative Sector programmes to ensure effectiveness and cohesion. It consists of the Speaker of the National Assembly, the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly, the Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces and the Speakers and Deputy Speakers of all nine Provincial Legislatures. National Assembly Speaker Ms Baleka Mbete chairs the Forum. A key issue discussed by the Forum was the need to strengthen the existing regulatory framework on ethics for public representatives. It is necessary that the Legislative Sector play a leading role in combating corruption. In this regard, an assessment of current mechanisms is being conducted to amend or strengthen these where necessary. The Forum also reiterated the need for the budget of the Legislative Sector to provide adequately for its oversight and legislative mandate. The Sector is concerned that, currently, it is unable to optimally realise its mandate because of inadequate funding. To the extent that there may be a need for legislative intervention about this, that will be explored and the relevant legislative process will be followed. The Forum also noted progress made with implementing the recommendations of the High Level Panel on the Assessment of Key Legislation and the Acceleration of Fundamental Change. Parliament has since established a Subcommittee, co-chaired by the House Chairpersons for Committees of the two Houses. The Subcommittee’s task is to ensure that the recommendations of the Panel receive consideration within Parliament. The Provincial Legislatures will attend to province-specific matters needing immediate attention. On international participation, reports were shared in respect of the following forums: Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA), 138th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), 62nd Session of the United Nations’ Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), Pan African Parliament (PAP) and BRICS Parliamentary Forum. The content of these reports showed the extent to which the Legislative Sector is increasingly enhancing leadership and contributing at international parliamentary platforms. An important event that took place on the sidelines of the Speakers’ Forum meeting was the launch of a R140 million partnership programme between the European Union (EU) and the Legislative Sector of South Africa. EU Commissioner for International Cooperation and Development Mr Neven Mimica was in attendance. Ms Mbete expressed her appreciation of the efforts by the EU and the partnership in supporting South Africa’s developmental agenda. The programme will assist the Sector in its efforts to give particular attention to the alignment of oversight instruments like the Sector Oversight Model as well as efforts to systematically track implementation of the National Development Plan. The Speakers’ Forum meeting agreed to compile a Legacy Report, highlighting achievements and matters still needing attention. This will serve as an invaluable resource for the Speakers’ Forum and the Legislative Sector, as a whole, during the 6th Parliament. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA ON BEHALF OF THE SPEAKERS’ FORUM OF THE LEGISLATIVE SECTOR OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo - 082 370 6930 Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns.Read more