Parliament, Tuesday, 17 April 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Economic Development today received briefings from the Industrial Development Corporation (IDC), Competition Commission and the Competition Tribunal on their strategic plans and annual performance plans for 2018/19. We are heartened by the recent rating by Moody’s giving us the indication that we are on an upward path. The Industrial Development Corporation is encouraged to become more accessible and supportive to emerging enterprises and it will establish a strategy to support the 4th Industrial Revolution. IDC has indicated that it will be sourcing funds from local development finance institutions and is encouraged to utilise and capitalise on them. The IDC has indicated that South Africa’s growth prospects are set to improve in 2018. The economy’s pace of expansion is forecast at 1.4% for 2018 and to accelerate towards 2.8% by 2020, where substantially improved contributions are expected from household spending, fixed investment activity and export sales. Whilst such improved growth rates are welcomed, these remain below the National Development Plan’s desired average annual growth target of 5.4% per annum over the period up to 2030. The committee supports the measures taken against the Shiva Uranium Mine, which owes the IDC R287.5 million which includes principal and interest costs. The committee further advised the IDC to strengthen its capacity at local level to develop the people and the communities around the IDC and bring the Batho Pele principle to life. The committee also heard from the Competition Commission that it has not been given additional funds for 2018/19 and that it is doing more with less. About 60% of the budget goes towards the cost of human resources. The Chairperson of the Committee, Ms Elsie Coleman, said: “We cannot amend the Annual Performance Plan, however, the budget can be looked at during the mid-term review process. The committee also heard from the Competition Tribunal on the large number of cases/complaints which it received from the Competition Commission – being 45 in 2017/2018 – which is almost double the number of the previous year. This is due to the same case/s being registered by different clients. For the start of this financial year it has received 11 complaints. The Competition Tribunal is confident that the cases are manageable and has been lauded for its revamped website and its initiatives in enhancing stakeholder communication. The Chairperson of the Economic Development Committee welcomes the announcement yesterday by President Cyril Ramaphosa, on the President’s Special Envoys on Investment and wishes Mr Trevor Manuel, Mr Mcebisi Jonas, Ms Phumzile Langeni, and Mr Jacko Maree well on their mission to seek investors abroad and domestically to invest in South Africa. The Chair congratulates Ms Trudy Makhaya on her appointment as Adviser and Coordinator of the Special Envoys. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, MS ELSIE COLEMAN. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Economic Development, Ms Elsie Coleman contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more