Parliament, Tuesday, 17 April 2018 – The National Treasury today informed the Select Committee on Appropriations that it is currently considering the required changes to be made to the scholar transport funding model in South Africa. Addressing the Committee, Mr Steven Kenyon, Director: Local Government and Budget Framework, National Treasury, said the Department of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation (DPME) is currently leading a performance and expenditure review process on the issues relating to scholar transport across all provinces. Based on the outcomes of this work, the National Treasury will look at the required changes to be made to the funding model, said Mr Kenyon. Mr Kenyon was responding to inputs received from the Equal Education (EE) Movement on the 2018 Division of Revenue Bill which highlighted, among other things, the dire need for a conditional grant directed at learner transport. Ms Philile Ntombela-Masson, a researcher at EE, said the lack of transport especially in rural areas is a serious barrier to education and learners often traverse dangerous terrains and threatening situations to get to school. Provincial Education Departments (PEDs) usually cite inadequate funds as one of the main reasons for not providing transport to all learners who qualify, and it has been the observation of EE that budgets for scholar transport is often the first to be cut when provinces face budgetary pressure said Ms Ntombela-Masson. The 2018 Division of Revenue Bill makes no mention of a conditional grant for learner transport and EE thus recommended that the committee, along with Provincial Treasuries, urge the National Treasury to provide a conditional grant for scholar transport. Mr Kenyon cautioned against the belief that a conditional grant will solve the issues around learner transport, highlighting the fact that the National Treasury has observed numerous challenges in the implementation of conditional grants. The committee welcomed the submissions from the Equal Education Movement and other stakeholders such as the Kagiso Trust, and said that this will form an important part of their report on the 2018 Division of Revenue Bill. Meanwhile, the committee also notes and welcomes the appointment by President Cyril Ramaphosa of the business and finance envoys to drive a programme which seeks to draw $100 billion in investment to South Africa. Acting Chairperson of the committee, Mr Charel de Beer, said “the committee wishes the envoys well in this important assignment”. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS, MR CHAREL DE BEER. For media enquiries or interviews with the Acting Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Felicia Lombard
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more