Parliament, Thursday, 19 April 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform today received briefings from the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform on progress registered to date on Communal Property Association (CPA) in the North West Province. During the public hearings on the Communal Property Amendment Bill held in the North West Province, the committee heard allegations of impropriety and corruption from the officials of the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform. One of the allegations was that the department is colluding with some politicians to ensure that the rightful beneficiaries do not benefit. One of the stakeholders alleged that government officials hold shares or interests in the CPA and, one of the communities requested a forensic investigation as billions of rands have been spent without the knowledge of CPA members. There is an allegation of the involvement of a senior official in the matters of the CPA, although the management of the CPA was not his responsibility. The committee gave this official an opportunity to respond to these allegations, but was not satisfied with the response. The Acting Chairperson of the Committee, Mr Pumzile Mnguni has directed the department to conduct an inquiry into the allegations of corruption brought against the senior departmental official and other CPAs in the North West Province and to report back to the committee. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM, MR PUMZILE MNGUNI. For media enquiries or interviews with the chairperson contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more