Parliament, Friday, 20 April 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training yesterday met with the Council of the Cape Peninsula University of Technology (CPUT) at Parliament, following the meeting of the committee with the CPUT stakeholders on 27 March 2018 at CPUT where the council didn’t attend. The CPUT council briefed the committee on, among other things, the role of council according to Section 27 of the Higher Education Act, leadership instability at CPUT, student accommodation, filling of vacancies, oversight on implementation of policies by university management, progress made to addressing student and labour issues, council meetings and resolutions taken to address issues and infrastructure issues. The Chairperson of the Committee, Ms Connie September, told the council the committee was very concerned about the prevailing unharmonious relationship between the council and the university stakeholders. Ms September urged the council to always provide qualitative and effective leadership at the university. “University by its nature is a site of the struggle of ideas. CPUT is a higher learning institution. Provide leadership and ensure that there is prevalence of a harmonious atmosphere at the university,” Ms September told the council. Ms September asked the council to present to the committee its plans for the creation of a harmonious atmosphere at the university, that promotes peaceful engagements between the university leadership and its stakeholders. The committee told the council to respond in writing to all the submissions that were made by the university stakeholders to the committee during the meeting that took place in March at the university, where the council was absent. The committee will determine the date for its next meeting with the council. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING, MS CONNIE SEPTEMBER. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mava Lukani (Mr) 
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 5031840
	E-mail: mlukani@parliament.gov.za The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping.Read more