Parliament, Tuesday, 24 April 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs unanimously adopted the terms of reference for the inquiry into the process undertaken by the Department of Home Affairs to grant the Gupta family naturalisation. The inquiry follows an instruction by House Chairperson for Committees, Mr Cedric Frolick, for committees to probe allegations of state capture. Following various interactions with various Ministers, and departmental officials, the committee resolved to institute an inquiry on the process undertaken to grant the family their naturalisation status. The agreed terms of reference will have two phases. The first phase will entail the committee collecting information from the department and relevant stakeholders. This phase will also include a call to the general public to provide the committee with any information it (the public) might have in relation to the matter under inquiry. This phase is already underway and should be concluded within a short time. The first phase will determine if there is need for the committee to move to Phase Two, which will entail a session/s where the committee will interview witnesses. Phase One will also determine if there is a need for an evidence leader to take the process forward. There was also unanimous agreement that the terms of reference must be broad enough to ensure that this matter is investigated thoroughly. As a result, the committee agreed that it will also look into foreign employees working within companies of the Gupta family to assess if they had received their work permits as per the prescripts of the law. The committee has committed itself to thoroughly investigate the matter and to leave no stone unturned. “The primary consideration of the committee is ensuring accountability and ensuring that our laws as passed by this Parliament are respected and enforced,” said Mr Donald Gumede, the Acting Chairperson of the committee. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, MR DONALD GUMEDE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more