Parliament, Tuesday, 17 April 2018 - The Portfolio Committee on Energy was briefed by the Department of Energy (DoE) on its Annual Performance Plan and Budget Vote for 2018/19. The committee noted with concern the decrease in budget allocation for clean energy. Briefing the committee, the DoE said 5% had been budgeted for clean energy. Members of the committee questioned how the department will achieve 30% of clean energy in 2025 if there are budget cuts for clean energy. The committee said it is concerning that the department has a budget reduction of R1.1 billion whilst compensation of employees has increased. Four critical positions of Deputy Directors-General remain vacant. The committee was of the view that an urgent follow-up meeting needs to be scheduled with the department where the Minister will be present as there are pressing and immediate issues that need to be addressed, such as the status of strategic fuel stock, the restructuring of the CEF (Central Energy Fund), the Integrated Resource Plan and the future of the nuclear new build programme. The committee said the document presented by the department does not address what is currently happening within the department and its state-owned companies. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Fikile Majola, said the engagement with the department should be able to assist the committee with the upcoming budget vote especially on issues that the committee has dealt with in the fifth parliament. Members need to walk away knowing what it is that they have achieved in providing oversight to the department and its entities. "The Minister needs to come and a brief the committee before the budget vote which is scheduled for May. It is the last one for the committee," said Mr Majola. In addressing the issue of the nuclear build programme, Mr Majola said: “The nuclear build is on the table as per the current annual performance plan but the Minister should be able to provide answers on what is the perspective on the nuclear programme. The Minister should be able to give a clear government position on the matter.” ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, MR FIKILE MAJOLA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee's Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly.Read more