The South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) should communicate effectively in advance before bringing new shows and presenters on radio and television. This was said by a member of the Portfolio Committee on Communications, Ms Phumzile van Damme, during a committee meeting on Thursday morning. The SABC board and management appeared before the committee to present the annual performance plan for the 2018/19 financial year. According to Ms Van Damme, the SABC communicated poorly about the changes that were effected on SAfm radio at the beginning of this month. “The fact that I am hearing for the first time now about the reasons that necessitated changes at SAfm is a serious concern to me. The communication is poor and it must be improved,” she said. On the other hand, Ms Van Damme thanked the corporation for extensively covering the national congress of the Democratic Alliance (DA) – which took place earlier this month.in Tshwane. She said the SABC did well, for the first time, this time around because in the past, the DA would to go to Court to demand a coverage. Another committee member, Mr Lerumo Kalako, wanted to know if the SABC Chairperson, Mr Bongumusa Makhathini, was aware of a newspaper article which reported about one board member, Mr Dinkwanyane Mohuba. According to the article which appeared in the Sowetan newspaper on Tuesday, 17 April 2018, the University of Limpopo has taken a decision not to award Mr Mohuba a doctorate in commerce degree, pending investigation on his thesis. Mr Kalako wanted to know if the board has considered taking action against Mr Mohuba. Mr Makhathini said the board will wait for the internal investigation of the university to be finalised before pronouncing on a way forward. Members of the committee welcomed the SABC presentation, saying that it brought hope to the fact that that the corporation could be turned around to its former glory. By Justice Molafo
	19 April 2018 The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”.Read more