Parliament, Tuesday, 24 April 2018 – Mandates from eight provincial legislatures in favour of the 2018 Division of Revenue Bill received by the Select Committee on Appropriations today highlighted a number of concerns and recommendations. One of the critical concerns received from North West and Eastern Cape in particular, relates to the grants for road maintenance. Committee member Mr Tekoetsile Motlashuping said “While Mpumalanga province receives maintenance for the coal haulage, North West province which houses three of the largest cement companies, is not afforded the same funds for lime stone, platinum or chrome haulage.” It is their recommendation that the National Treasury not only look at the allocations, but also monitor the expenditure and implementation of these grants. The Eastern Cape Provincial Legislature, in its mandate, highlighted the inaccessibility of road maintenance grants to municipalities in rural areas. The mandate states that the conditions of roads in areas such as Ndlambe, which depend on transportation for the agriculture sector, make it extremely difficult to operate. Addressing the committee, Mr Steven Kenyon, Director: Local Government and Budget Framework, National Treasury, said while the National Treasury plays a critical role, it remains the responsibility of departments to monitor the implementation and spending of grants. Linked to issues around road maintenance grants is the reduction in the Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG). The Northern Cape Provincial Legislature states that the reduction of the MIG poses a big concern for the viability of municipalities that do not have adequate revenue, and the MIG should therefore be increased. Mandates received from provinces will form part of the committee’s report on the 2018 Division of Revenue Bill. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS, MR CHAREL DE BEER. For media enquiries or interviews with the Acting Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Felicia Lombard
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more