Parliament, Friday, 27 April 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation has said it is appalled by the new regulations the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) has approved regarding female athletes running 400m, 800m and 1500m events among others. The Chairperson of the committee Ms Beauty Dlulane said this new attempt is nothing but a guise to slow down South Africa’s champion athlete, Ms Caster Semenya. “We have noted this announcement by the IAAF and as the committee we are appalled and concerned by long-term implications of such a decision. This is heavy handedness on the part of the IAAF and a plan to suspend Caster. This should be challenged,” Ms Dlulane said. “Administration of athletic is a prerogative of the IAAF, but if in hosting competitions the international body interferes with human rights of athletes, then the sporting community has a right to point that out and be angry,” she said. The IAAF announced on Thursday 26 April 2018 that female athletes with naturally high testosterone, will have to take medication to lower their levels. The regulation will come into effect from 01 November, 2018. “This is unacceptable and should be challenged by SASCOC under the guidance of government” Said Ms Dlulane. Ms Dlulane said the latest decision borders on unfairness and could see IAAFloses credibility in the eyes of many. “Policies and regulations should not be made as we go along, merely to kill competition.” ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SPORT AND RECREATION, MS BEAUTY DLULANE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them.Read more