Parliament, Tuesday, 24 April 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs has lambasted the Department of Home Affairs for the sluggish manner that the department is complying with the Constitutional Court judgement in relation to the Section 34 of the Immigration Act. On 29 June 2017, the Constitutional Court confirmed a High Court ruling that declared Section 34 (1) (b) and (c) of the Immigration Act (Act No.13 of 2002) inconsistent with Section 12 (1) and 35 (2) (d) of the Constitution in that the Act does not allow a detained illegal foreigner to challenge the lawfulness of his detention in person in court within 48 hours. This declaration was suspended for 24 months to enable a process to remedy the defect. The committee is thus concerned that the department is only now putting into motion such a process to remedy the defect. “This means the department essentially took nine months to start this process, which places undue pressure on the committee and by extension, on Parliament to finish the process within the remaining period of suspension,” said Mr Donald Gumede, the Acting Chairperson for the committee. The absence of the Minister, the Deputy Minister, the Director-General and any senior management team of the department from the meeting also impeded the committee’s ability to ask questions for clarity. As a result, the committee has unanimously resolved to call the Minister, the Deputy Minister and the Director-General to appear before it in its next meeting to account on reasons of the delay. “Court rulings must be respected as they guide us and ensure that our Constitution is adhered to,” Mr Gumede emphasised. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, MR DONALD GUMEDE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	 E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more