Parliament, Tuesday, 24 April 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries today received a presentation from the Land Bank on transformation and inclusive growth in the agricultural sector. In 2012, the Land Bank launched the Retail Emerging Markets (REM) Unit to assist emerging farmers to access funding who would not ordinarily receive assistance from commercial banks. The Land Bank through REM Unit lent R101.7 million in 2012 while in 2017 it lent R967.2 million. Through all its divisions, the Land Bank was able to lend out R35.5 billion. However, the Land Bank needs to provide details on transformation in the sector regarding empowering emerging farmers, in particular how many women, youth and farmers with disabilities were assisted and how many agricultural entrepreneurs have emerged during the period 2015 to 2018. The Land Bank will report back to the Committee in writing within 14 days. Due to time constraints, the Committee will further engage with the Land Bank on their developmental agenda and transformation. The Committee also received a presentation from the South African Veterinary Council (SAVC) on its strategic goals for 2017-2019. The Committee recommended that SAVC embark on comprehensive communication and awareness campaigns on all diseases that would impact on both humans and animals. The Chairperson, Ms Rosina Semenya, advised the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries to finalise the strategy to revolutionise the veterinary profession. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES, MS ROSINA MACHWENE SEMENYA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2289
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote.Read more