The Department of Women in the Presidency did not submit the draft annual performance plan for 2018/19 on 31 January 2018, as agreed in the engagement letter. This was revealed in a meeting on Tuesday when the Auditor-General of South Africa (AGSA) briefed the Portfolio Committee on Women in the Presidency on the review of the 2018/19 draft annual performance plan of the Department of Women in the Presidency. The purpose of the briefing was to provide audit insights on the interim review of the department’s draft annual performance plan (APP) which is intended to add value on the oversight role of the committee. AGSA shared risks identified during the 2017/18 status records review that might impact the 2017/18 audit outcome if not attended to. AGSA told the committee that the draft APP for 2018/19 was submitted on 19 February 2018 for purposes of the review. Briefing the committee, AGSA said the department remains with unauthorised expenditure of R29.5 million, incurred in the previous years. However, AGSA said management has engaged with National Treasury regarding some of the unauthorised expenditure incurred and how these will be dealt with. Members of the committee expressed concern over the findings by the AGSA. The committee indicated that the previous minister should able respond to some of the issues that are raised by AGSA. Members questioned what the consequences are for not tabling a report on time. In its response the AGSA said, the AG would report it as a non-compliance by the departments and that the department did not do what it is was supposed to do. The Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) briefed the committee on its strategy for 2018/22 and annual performance plan for 2018/19.  The CGE appealed to the committee to note its funding constraints that pose challenges and potential impact on the CGE programmes, including financial viability. The CGE informed the committee that due to inadequacy of funding, the Commission will not be able to fill critical vacant positions in the establishment, essential in the execution of the strategic plan. By Yoliswa Landu 24 April 2018 Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs.Read more