Parliament, Thursday, 5 April 2018 – The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) is shocked and disappointed with the fact that one man can hold the whole country to ransom by having the power to switch off the criminal justice system. This raises the question of whether the South African Police Service (SAPS) is renting this equipment from Forensic Data Analysts (FDA) or owns it because from what the committee understands FDA is said to be handling the maintenance of this system only. Therefore, it is really puzzling as to why one man can have such power over equipment that is owned by the government. If this equipment has been bought by the government, what gives FDA the right to switch it off? Scopa is also wondering what kind of contracts were entered into with FDA because this arrangement is a betrayal of the national interest. The committee believes that this matter should be attended to expeditiously if SAPS and government are serious about national security. Secondly, the call Scopa made not to continue with the payments of the contract arose from the fact that the officials themselves were questioning the legality of the contracts. Scopa then said if there is illegality, the officials should not pay. Scopa did not just make the call in a vacuum, the call was informed by the concerns from the officials. Scopa is scheduled to meet with SAPS to clarify matters relating to various contracts including the FDA contract. Scopa is going to prioritise the meeting with SAPS in the light of these shenanigans by FDA. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSONS OF SCOPA, MR THEMBA GODI. For media enquiries, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more