Parliament, Thursday, 6 December 2018  The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) has requested National Treasury to priorities the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) forensic report that details the transgressions and recommendations on what actions should be taken against all those implicated in the report. The committee welcomes the IFMS forensic report and extends its appreciation to the internal auditors and the audit committee of National Treasury as the internal audit report was the basis of the good report from Nexus and it was the audit committee that rejected the low quality report from Deloitte. Scopa would also like to caution National Treasury about following the administrative processes that are in place as it is the department that should be setting an example to other departments and entities of government particularly when it comes to adhering to Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) and National Treasury Regulations. Scopa is also concerned with the fact that some people implicated in the report are former employees of the State Information Technology Agency (SITA) that are currently employed by ICT-Works, a service provider that is implicated in the IFMS forensic report. In relation to IFMS 1, one of the key witnesses there, was ICT-Works. ICT-Works submitted discs that did not meet their contractual obligations. At that time National Treasury was within its right to terminate the contract, but did not. “That is what brought us to where we are today, by not terminating and renegotiating more contracts. This raises the question of, if this is most important system for government, how was this system monitored politically by Cabinet", said the committee Chairperson Mr Themba Godi. The committee also believes that it is important to understand that the weakest link of IFMS 2 is the Programme Management Office and all the transgressions happened in that office that was led by Michael Sass and Lindy Bodewig who are the two individuals that were key in that office and who landed the department into this huge challenge of IFMS 2. It is up to those two individuals, according to the committee, to explain themselves out of this process because it was Lindy Bodewig who raised the project and it was Michael Sachs who approved it. There is also a Mohammed Cassiem whose standing is really questionable in this report and who is overpaid. The committee wants to know who is this Mohammed Cassiem and what was his role in National Treasury. The committee is also concerned with the leadership of this IFMS project from the beginning and wants to understand how the project is currently led politically and the role of Cabinet and the Minister of Finance as this is an important project that impacts on the whole of government. The committee looks forward to receiving a progress report from National Treasury of how it will deal with the report, particularly after it has engaged with the responses from all the implicated parties. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF SCOPA, MR THEMBA GODI. For media enquiries, please contact the committees Media Officer: Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly.Read more