Parliament, Wednesday, 05 December 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Labour today met with the management of horse-racing and betting operator, Phumelela Gaming and Leisure Ltd, to discuss working and living conditions of grooms who are responsible for the welfare and maintenance of the horses under their supervision. The committee had called Phumelela to respond to concerns and questions about the living and working conditions of horse grooms employed at its facilities. In August this year the committee conducted an oversight visit to the North Rand Training Centre at the Randjesfontein Race Course in Midrand, Gauteng, and discovered appalling conditions at the hostels, where four or five men shared one small room with gas stoves for cooking located outside their rooms. Phumelela representatives told the committee that the hostel facilities where the grooms are accommodated are leased to the horse trainers, who are the direct employers of the grooms and are therefore responsible for their overall wellbeing. Mr Siza Khampepe, a Director from Phumelela, told the committee that they were therefore not responsible for the poor living conditions of the horse grooms. After a lengthy discussion with the committee it was agreed that there were shortcomings in the living conditions of the horse grooms and action needed to be taken to address these. Phumelela also informed the committee that plans were in place to improve the living conditions with only two people sharing a room. The committee’s main concern is to ensure that all relevant laws are complied with. It also advised Phumelela, and the grooms’ associations to work closely with the horse trainers in order to resolve most of the challenges in the industry. Phumelela should move towards clarifying the roles in order to apportion accountability. The committee also wants the conditions of the grooms improved, including compliance with the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF). ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, MR LEMIAS MASHILE For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact: Name: Sakhile Mokoena
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2804
	Cell: 081 705 2130
	E-mail: smokoena@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more