Parliament, Thursday, 6 December 2018 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training has commended the University of Zululand (UniZulu) for suspending the SRC (Student Representative Council) members who are accused of misconduct at a private property. Students are alleged to have looted Gooderson Drakensberg Gardens Golf and Spa Resort during a strategic planning workshop. The Chairperson of the committee Ms Connie September urged the University and the hotel to use the law to correctively deal with the thievery that took place. “Strong leadership is required from the students. It is disappointing when student leadership is involved in stupid acts that involve stealing and destruction. Students should not be associated with such acts as they are future aspiring leaders. This is unnecessary attention brought to the university whose leadership and governance challenges still need resolution,” said Ms September. The University of Zululand suspended 12 out of its 15-member SRC and appointed an administrator to run the affairs of students. Ms September also welcomed the reports of arrests that had been made regarding the death of Prof Gregory Kamwendo. The committee is opposed to acquiring of fraudulent degrees and believes that the recently adopted National Qualifications Authority Bill addresses some of these challenges. It is believed that Prof Kamwendo was investigating issuing of fraudulent degrees at the institution at the time of his passing. “The committee wishes to commend the swift investigations by law enforcement agencies on this matter and believes the perpetrators of this heinous act will be brought to book. “The loss of Prof Kamwendo left the sector and the country poorer at the point when the economy needed sharp minds.” ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING, MS CONNIE SEPTEMBER. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs.Read more