Parliament, Friday, 07 December 2018 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Labour, Mr Lemias Mashile, welcomes the announcement of the implementation date of the National Minimum Wage by President Cyril Ramaphosa. The President announced that the National Minimum Wage will be implemented from 01 January 2019.  This follows the recent passing into law of the National Minimum Wage Bill into law. The National Minimum Wage is one of the legacy legislations considered by the committee and passed by both houses of Parliament during its 5th term. The committee reiterates its view that while the minimum wage is a reasonable beginning, much more efforts should be placed in reaching the desired living wage. The implementation of the minimum wage is another step in closing the huge inequality that is prevalent in the country. The committee is of the view that the minimum wage will improve the lives of many families that have been earning less and will contribute in stimulating the economy as a result of increased participation by many in the country. The committee calls on employers to take note and make plans to implement the minimum wage. Furthermore, the committee calls on the Department of Labour to put in place monitoring mechanism to ensure adherence to the minimum wage. The committee remains of the view that a happy labour market is essential if the country is to grow economically. This is important if the country is to succeed in fighting the triple challenges of unemployment, poverty and inequality. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, MR LEMIAS MASHILE For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly.Read more