Parliament, Wednesday, 28 February 2018 – The Standing Committee on Appropriations, having expressed the urgent need for evidence-based research on the extent and benefits of providing state-funded transport to learners attending public schools, was today briefed by the Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC). One of the key issues raised by Dr Peter Jacobs, Research Director in the Economic Performance and Development Research Programme (EPD), was the lack of reliable data, especially at district level. The committee was briefed, amongst other things, on the average distance and time travelled by learners; the availability of transportation to schools; and the roles played by various departments and spheres of government in providing safe, reliable and affordable transport for learners. The committee is seriously concerned about the lack of intergovernmental cooperation, particularly between the departments of Basic Education and Transport. The committee further raised concerns about the lack of good data, budgeting mechanisms and the effective use of these budgets in learner transport programmes. The committee said that effective data systems provide important building blocks for planning and implementation. As the 2018 budget shows, provinces face substantial spending pressures to provide health, education and other services to growing populations. Spending efficiency is a priority over the medium term, and only reliable data can provide the level of detail required to ensure the necessary links between planning, budgeting, and monitoring and evaluation. The committee said that it is clear that the Office of the Chief Procurement Officer must immediately become involved in the learner transport programme to ensure that procurement and contract management within the programmes are streamlined. Learners cannot suffer from delays in tendering or contract issues, especially where funds are in place. Committee Chairperson Ms Yvonne Phosa commended the HSRC for timeously responding to the request for the research. The committee pledged support to the HSRC on district-level data on scholar transport and ensuring cooperation with provincial departments in supplying data to important research institutions, such the HSRC. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS, MS YVONNE PHOSA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Felicia Lombard
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed.Read more