Parliament, Tuesday, 27 February 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises, tasked with dealing with the Inquiry into the mismanagement of state funds in state-owned enterprises, heard evidence from G9 Consulting Services. G9 was appointed by Eskom’s Anti-Corruption and Forensic Unit headed by Ms Thembeka Ndaba to investigate allegations by a whistle-blower in respect of two payments made to Trillian. During his testimony the CEO of G9 Consulting, Rajie Murugan, shared how his investigation into the relations between Eskom and Trillian revealed that the contract contravened Eskom’s polices and the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA). The investigation by G9 lasted for six weeks. The Committee welcomed evidence given by G9 to come and appear before the Committee to set the record straight. Mr Murugan informed the Committee that Mr Anoj Singh lied to the Committee under oath by informing the members that G9 withdrew its report. Eskom’s Board Chairperson, Mr Zethembe Khoza, was responsible for ending the investigation. Mr Murugan said the information presented by Mr Singh was misleading. The Committee was of the view that the information and evidence by G9 is helpful as it gives insight into the Trillian contract. The Committee said what is outrageous is that G9 presented the report in August to the power utility and the board appeared before the Inquiry and gave a different spin to the Trillian contract. The Committee said what is clear is that there is a clear breach of fiduciary duties and that is disgraceful. The Committee is of the view that the debacle that happened at Eskom means that people who are implicated should be held criminally liable. Adv Dumisa Ntsebeza, who has worked with Mr Murugan, said in his opening remarks: “What struck me was how Eskom’s leadership would abruptly terminate the mandate of the investigation at a very critical time. There would have been an exposure of the most corrupt practices of leadership at Eskom.” Addressing issues that have been in the public domain regarding the work of the Inquiry, the Chairperson for the Inquiry, Ms Zukiswa Rantho, said, the Committee will continue to do its work “until we are informed otherwise. If there is something in law that suggest we must stop, we will be advised as such”. Members of the Committee said today’s interaction confirms that no one must be called back to appear before the Committee. The Committee was of the view that taxpayers’ money must not be wasted by people who misled the Committee deliberately under oath. The Chairperson for the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises, Ms Lungi Mnganga-Gcabashe, said: “We should not re-invite anyone who was here before us, no one must be recalled. The matter should be left with law enforcement agencies which deal with these matters.” ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE INQUIRY FOR THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES, MS ZUKISWA RANTHO. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs.Read more