The Portfolio Committee on Labour is satisfied with the progress the Compensation Fund (CF) is making in improving its service to the people. The CF was in Parliament to update the Committee on progress on its action plan. CF Commissioner Mr Vuyo Mavata told the Committee that improvements were mainly intended to improve service delivery. “When we started with the plan, service delivery had ground to a halt. We are now focused on four pillars of the plan, which are mainly geared to improve finances, customer service, business administration and people management,” Commissioner Mavata said. He said the CF is dealing with backlogs and that some 21 000 cases in which the CF accepted liability had not been completed, which was down from 442 000. A revised staff structure has been approved and it is being implemented. “We have adopted a two-pronged strategy with regards to human resources. We now recruit people with the skills we require, especially the financial skills and medical skills. In situations where our employees do not have the necessary skills we send them for training in the two areas,” he said. Committee Member Mr Michael Bagraim commented that this good work should be communicated, as the public still had a perception that applying to the fund was a waste of time. “The negative media comments are a concern and the best way to counter them is to start speaking to the radio stations yourself. You need to tell the people the good news that comes out of the Fund,” Mr Bagraim said. Committee Members were pleased with the progress reported since the appointment of Mr Mavata, but they did ask questions about funding, pending disciplinary action, information and technology systems, medical claims and the Umehluko system used by CF. The fund replied that there were small challenges with Umehluko, but on the whole the system was stable and working. “We are looking to deal with all the weaknesses in the system,” Mr Mavata said. Sibongile Maputi
	21 February 2018 It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly.Read more