Parliament, Wednesday, 21 February 2018 – Members of the Portfolio Committee on Transport today called for a revision of Section 18 of the National Land and Transport Amendment Bill, which deals with regulatory functions of municipalities. The proposed amendments allow municipalities to give notice, in a prescribed manner and following the prescribed public participation procedures, that it will no longer receive applications for licences for new services. The Committee is of the opinion that the proposed amendment, in both the principle Act of 2009 and the proposed Amendment Bill, will continue to cause havoc amongst transport operators across the country. The Committee said that operators who try to renew their licences are often told that the route has been earmarked for Bus Rapid Transit Systems (BRT), thus creating a situation where operators have no choice but to operate illegally. To avoid this, integrated public transport should accommodate the minibus industry as a feeder of all modes. The Chairperson of the Committee, Ms Dikeledi Magadzi, encouraged Members of the Committee to keep in mind that the legislation affects not only municipalities, but also provincial transport hubs. The introduction of BRT systems should not impede on the business of current transport operators. While the Department’s Chief Director, Mr Hament Patel, indicated that the clause is only applicable to licences for new services, Members highlighted various instances such as those in George in 2015 where a number of Go George busses were set alight due to the non-renewal of licences. The Committee deliberated on the National Land Transport Amendment Bill and is in agreement that this particular proposed amendment should either be removed or revised so as to not impede the business of current operators. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, MS DIKELEDI MAGADZI For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Felicia Lombard
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8285
	Cell: 081 548 7011
	E-mail: flombard@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party.Read more