Members of Parliament’s finance cluster highlighted their concern about the reductions in provincial and local government’s capital spending, as presented by the Financial Fiscal Commission (FFC) in a briefing. A joint meeting with the Standing Committee on Finance, the Standing Committee on Appropriations, the Select Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on Appropriations yesterday received a 2018 post-budget analysis from the FFC. Following the tabling of the Budget last week, the committees are in the legislative process of finalising the budget as Parliament reviews the executive’s revenue and spending plans, including their alignment with government’s policy priorities over the medium term. Co-Chairperson Ms Yvonne Phosa said: “Some of the main risks outlined in the Budget include the fact that economic growth remains weak, unemployment remains high and the finances of major state-owned enterprises have become more precarious.”  Ms Phosa further highlighted the extent of corruption and wasteful expenditure in the public sector, saying that this together with government’s efficiency challenges in tax administration have adversely affected tax morality. “The medium term cost of fee-free higher education and training and public service compensation are uncertain,” she said. These are all formidable challenges, but Ms Phosa said she was sure MPs would be able to offer various solutions. While the FFC welcomed the efforts to balance the budget through consolidation, it believes “conditional grant allocations to provinces and municipalities will bear the brunt of government’s need to cut and reprioritise spending”. Capital spending cuts are detrimental to future growth, FFC officials said, and result in project implementation delays, which compound delivery backlogs. The committees were told that national development goals should be borne in mind, with the aim of unlocking capacity constraints in local economies. The committees heard that reductions in provincial spending over the 2018 medium term economic framework period for both the provincial equitable share and conditional grants amount to R18.3 billion, affecting the sectors of human settlements (R7.2 billion), education (R511 million) and health (R3.6 billion) where conditional grants are inconsistent with spending performances. While reductions in local government spending is targeted at conditional grants only, the committees heard that the largest cuts will affect four grants: the Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG), the Public Transport Network Grant, the Integrated National Electrification Programme (INEP) and the Urban Settlement Development Grant (USDG). The FFC is of the opinion that these cuts target larger grants while ignoring smaller, but underperforming ones. Members of the financial cluster posed various questions to the FFC on the prospects of finding alternative cost-cutting measures, such as moving Parliament to Pretoria, placing a moratorium on international travel by government officials and targeting banking institutions offering loans to people who are unable to repay them. The FFC was requested to respond in writing to the various questions posed by Members. Felicia Lombard
	28 February 2018 Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more