Parliament, Sunday, 25 February 2018 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman, will on Tuesday attend the memorial service for the 5 policemen of the eNngcobo Police Station who were killed earlier this week. "As the Portfolio Committee we give moral support to the families of the deceased and the SAPS during this difficult time. This is also a clear sign that the thoughts and prayers of all South Africans are with families of the deceased policemen," Mr Beukman said. The Committee reiterates that it considers this attack a national tragedy and that members of the SAPS in prime of the lives become the victims of criminals who do not value life nor a peaceful society where law and order prevails. The Chairperson further encourage the community of Engcobo to give the necessary support to the SAPS members of the station during this very difficult time. Mr Beukman has also said that the incident has again highlighted the dangerous environment in which policemen and women operate, and the urgent need for SAPS to deal with violent organised crime as a matter of priority. The Portfolio Committee will meet with the National Commissioner in the next two weeks to get a briefing on the incident that took place in Engcobo. Beukman said that critical matters that came to the fore in the Engcobo with relation to crime intelligence, technology, tactical training and the security measures at police stations will come under scrutiny at the envisaged meeting. The Committee also welcomes the special debate on the incident that will take place on Wednesday in the National Assembly. “We believe that the Minister of Police should use the opportunity on Wednesday to spell out practical steps that SAPS national management will implement on an urgent and immediate basis to improve security at all SAPS police stations”. The meeting of the Portfolio Committee on Police that was planned for Tuesday with the National Commissioner on Police will be held later. The Portfolio meeting with the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (Hawks) on high profile cases on Wednesday will go ahead. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920 
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote.Read more