The tabling of this year’s national budget had to negotiate a delicate balancing act to make good on the State Capture shortfall, which has left a gapping fiscal wound on the coffers of our state-owned enterprises. However, its tabling this time around was delivered in a climate of great optimism instigated by an inspired State of the Nation Address (Sona) by our new President, Cyril Ramaphosa. This year’s Sona marked a new shift from both the political and economic uncertainties that dogged its preceding ones. “Almost 24 years later, President Ramaphosa captured the moment and mood aptly, and invoked optimism in delivering his inspirational inaugural State of the Nation Address,” said Minister of Finance, Mr Malusi Gigaba. Appropriating the budget might prove to be a much easier task than financing it to meet our country’s social and economic objectives, he said. “This is the challenge of our time, to build a South Africa in which all people have a decent standard of living, and access to economic opportunities. We stand before you with a profound sense of optimism, purpose and resolve.” Given the favourable global economic outlook, an opportunity exists to achieve faster economic growth, the Minister reassured the National Assembly. “That opportunity comes from a favourable global economic outlook, with many of our trading partners doing well, and from improved prices for our exports. That opportunity comes from a fiscal framework which has improved markedly since the October Medium Term Budget Policy Statement.” He admitted that this was a tough, but hopeful budget. “It required us to make difficult but necessary trade-offs, important to ensure that this budget is a platform for renewal, inclusive growth and job creation.” According to him, growth projections in agriculture, investment confidence and business have created necessary measures that have improved our country’s economic growth outlook. To turn this into tangible and sustainable economic benefits, there is a need to create a conducive investment, create employment and stabilise the financial management of state owned enterprises, he said. “President Ramaphosa made an unequivocal commitment in the State of the Nation Address to intervene decisively to stabilise and revitalise state-owned enterprises – and outlined in his response to the Sona drastic measures we are going to take to implement meaningful and far-reaching reforms in our state-owned enterprises. This could chart a course towards meeting the objectives of the NDP.” In this financial year, there is an anticipated economic growth of 1.5% in 2018, rising to 2.1% in 2020, he said. The collaborative initiative between labour, private sector and civil society and the CEO Initiative’s SME Fund to promote small business enterprises are welcome contributions to this projected growth, he further added. “The enormous potential of our partnership has been demonstrated by the CEO Initiative, which has established a business-led fund committing about R1.4bn to support high potential SMEs (small and medium-sized enterprises). The small business sector has been identified as one of the catalysts for growth and R 2.1bn has been committed to fund start-ups to get off the ground,” he said. He though warned that fiscal proposals were bound to cause some discomfort. One of which is the increase in taxes to raise the additional R36bn in the 2018/19 financial year. But it’s the increase in VAT that came as a surprise. But the Minister cautioned that this won’t affect those in lower income brackets. “We decided to increase VAT and that was unavoidable if we are to maintain the integrity of our public finances. The current zero rating of basic food items such as maize meal, brown bread, dried beans and rice will limit the impact on the poorest households.” These tax increases have necessitated the establishment of a commission of inquiry into tax administration and governance at SARS. And the government will respond to the Davis Tax Commission report to give effect to its recommendations. Fees Must Fall continues to haunt a budget that is already under siege, exacerbated by a diminishing tax revenue, but the Minister reassured learners that the government was committed to fund students who come from poor and working-class families. “This means that all new first-year students with a family income below R350 000 per annum at universities and TVET colleges in the 2018 academic year will be funded for the full cost of study. This will be rolled out in subsequent years until all years of study are covered. Returning NSFAS students at universities will have their loans for 2018 onwards converted to bursaries.” Apart from education, health has received a boost with the announcement of R4.2bn towards the funding of the much-awaited National Health Insurance (NHI), he said. “Our social protection systems continue to protect the poorest and most vulnerable and government has continued progressively on the path towards the NHI. Over the medium term, the NHI is allocated an additional R4.2bn, funded through an amendment to the medical expenses tax subsidy.” Land acquisition and land restitution claims got their fair share of the budget. Well over R10bn has been allocated for land acquisition and R4.2bn for land restitution claims. The Minister hailed the transparency and people-centred approach to budgeting that the National Treasury has adopted. He said: “South Africa continues to set the gold standard for budget transparency. Citizens should be proud of our international recognition in this regard. And we are grateful for the historical contributions of oversight institutions like Parliament and the Auditor-General towards this achievement.” By Abel Mputing 22 February 2018 A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more