Parliament, Tuesday, 27 February 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs today got briefings from the Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC) on the 2016 local government elections and from the Director-General of the Department of Home Affairs, Mr Mkuseli Apleni, on the information received in relation to the Gupta family’s early naturalisation at Parliament. On the early naturalisation of the Gupta family, Mr Apleni, briefed the Committee on the information on the exceptional circumstances that constituted grounds on which early naturalisation was granted by Mr Malusi Gigaba when he was the Minister of Home Affairs during his first tenure as Minister of that department. Mr Apleni explained the Act and other grounds for granting early naturalisation to the Guptas. After engagement with Mr Apleni and considering the fact that more information has been provided by the department, the Chairperson of the Committee, Mr Lemias Mashile, said: “Enough information has been provided by the Department of Home Affairs to the Committee. The Committee will at a right time take a decision on the basis of the information at its disposal.” Mr Mashile said the Committee will call the Director-General if there is still a need to do so. On briefing on the 2016 local government elections by the IEC, the Committee applauded the IEC for successful 2016 local government elections. The Committee also urged the IEC leadership to sustain that performance in the next elections. On the increased voter turnout in the 2016 elections, Mr Mashile asked the IEC to ensure that they do everything possible to ensure an ever-increasing voter turnout. Mr Mashile also appealed to members of political parties not to use the IEC as a political football. “The IEC is a national resource. Let’s ensure that we promote its image.” ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, MR LEMIAS MASHILE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mr Mava Lukani
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 5031840
	Email: mlukani@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more