Parliament, Tuesday, 27 February 2018 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman, has called on communities to embrace and protect police officers in order to effectively fight crime. Mr Beukman was speaking during the memorial of five officers brutally killed in eNgcobo last week. “A collaboration between the police and society in general is necessary if police are to fight crime effectively and if communities are to live in a safer environment. We call on communities to protect police by sharing information. Police should not be on their own,” said Mr Beukman. The Committee has urged the incoming Minister of Police to prioritise the safety of police officers and police stations. “The first priority for the incoming Minister is to put in place strategies to deal with the high murder rate of police officers.” "The eNgcobo attack and all killings of police officers is unacceptable. It is totally unacceptable that the symbol of the state can be attacked in this manner. It is time for South Africans to say: ‘No more’,” Mr Beukman emphasised. The Chairperson, on behalf of the Committee and Parliament, said that five of the country’s finest sons have been killed. “Our hearts and prayers go out to the families. These fallen officers are indeed our heroes,” Mr Beukman said. In an effort to ensure that these deaths are not in vain, the Committee will work closely with the Minister to find solutions to these attacks on police officers. The Committee has emphasised the need to strengthen safety at police stations. Furthermore, there is need to refocus policing towards intelligence-driven policing. The collaboration with communities to share information as a way to prevent crime must also be strengthened. These and other solutions must be urgently implemented by the South African Police Service. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more