The President of the Republic of South Africa, Mr Cyril Ramaphosa, addressed the annual opening the National House of Traditional Leaders at Parliament today. He did this in accordance with Section 18 (1) of the National House of Traditional Leaders, which stipulates that such a proceeding has to be presided by the designated President. Before the President’s speech, the Chairperson of the House of Traditional Leaders, King Sipho Mahlangu, emphasised the President’s call for all South Africans to lend a hand to change South Africa’s fortunes for the better. He also made an open invitation to the President for a more effective cooperation between the State and the House of Traditional Leaders. “Beyond today, we are inviting you to visit our house to address us and to allow us to address you when the need arises.” In his wide-ranging speech, the President reaffirmed that South Africa is in the midst of a new dawn that seeks to harness all of its potential to bring about transformation and inclusive economy for the benefit of all. He commended the house as one of the bedrocks of our constitutional democracy. “As we drafted our Constitution, we were aware that one of the institutions to be embedded in it was the institution of traditional leadership. We did so because we sought to safeguard it as not only the pillar and the bedrock of our people, but also as part and parcel of our new democracy.” The President applauded the traditional institution as a potent institution bequeathed to us by our forebears to serve the interests of the vulnerable. He further emphasised that government is required to affirm the contemporary interdependence of queens and chiefs and the people they lead. “This relationship of mutual interdependence between the ruler and the ruled is captured in the ancient saying, ‘inkosi yinkosi ngabantu’. This means that for traditional authority and government not to become despotic or tyrannical, its legitimacy and authority must be derived from satisfying the aspirations of the governed.” There is also a pressing need to harness the cooperation between government, social partners and traditional authorities to build a capable developmental state, he said. “We look to this House to work with government and other social partners to build a capable developmental state that will deliver clean water, sanitation, clinics and tarred roads especially to those who live in our remote rural villages.” We look to you to mobilise communities against poverty, unemployment, diseases and illiteracy, he said. “Traditional leaders are best suited to this task – for you are closest to our people on the ground, especially in rural areas,” he said. Amongst you emerged proud visionary leaders who sacrificed the comfort of their statuses and titles, who were motivated solely by the ideal of a better life for all, he said. “Because our people still yearn for justice, peace and fulfilment, we need servant leaders like Inkosi Jongintaba Dalindyebo, Inkosi Nelson Mandela and Inkosi Albert Luthuli. They were among our proud and visionary leaders who were ready to sacrifice their birthright, their titles and comfort to advance the struggle against racial division and to restore the dignity of black people.” As a country we are indeed embracing the new dawn and in so doing we must also embrace the notion of servant leaders, he said. “People are indeed celebrating the new dawn, a new era pregnant with hope and expectations. And the best way of paying tribute to Mandela is to turn this new dawn into action.” He reiterated government’s commitment to land expropriation and land reform. He said although this is a critical, emotive and sensitive issue, it is also steeped in our history and has brought a great deal of pain on our people. “Land dispossession is a defining feature of colonialism and apartheid in South Africa. Land hunger among black South Africans is genuine and pressing. The time has arrived that we act decisively to resolve this matter. We must repair the damage inflicted upon our people.” He, though, cautioned that we should see the expropriation of land as an opportunity, rather than a problem. Approached with a great skill and a determined way, this process can lay a foundation for an agricultural revolution, he said. “By providing more land to more producers for cultivation, and by providing the necessary support, we are laying the foundation for an agricultural revolution. We are determined to work with traditional leaders to significantly expand agriculture, not only to ensure food security, but also to create jobs on a significant scale and increase the value of our exports.” If approached as such, this process can help to curtail the huge unemployment rate of youth in rural areas, he said. “Among other things, this means that we need to make agriculture an attractive and viable career for young people. We need to improve and properly resource TVET colleges and other training institutions in rural areas.” Central to the long-term livelihood of rural communities is the drafting of a new version of Mining Charter, it is critical that the views of the affected communities are reflected in it, he said. “It is critical that affected communities are represented in these engagements and that the Charter, when finalised, effectively addresses their needs and interests.” He also promised that he will ensure that declarations made during the Indigenous and Traditional Leadership Indaba in 2017 are implemented. Most of all, he commended the passing of the Traditional and Khoi-San Leadership Bill as a major achievement that will go a long way in recognising the traditional authority of the Khoi-San communities. “The Bill will provide for statutory recognition of the Khoi-San communities and leaders while making provision for structures that will serve the interests of the Khoisan communities. A Commission on Khoi-San Matters will be established to assist government with the recognition process,” he said. As we celebrate Mandela’s centenary, we must reaffirm our shared commitment to serve the people, he said. “Let us reaffirm our shared determination to improve the lives of the poor and the marginalised and to build a united South African nation.” By Abel Mputing
	27 February 2018 Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them.Read more