The Minster of Communications, Ms Mmaloko Kubayi, has appealed to the Portfolio Committee on Communications to consider the calibre of people appointed to the boards of entities and also the gender ratio. Minister Kubayi led a strong departmental delegation to update the Committee on issues raised during an oversight visit to entities in Gauteng, the South African Broadcasting Corporation’s (SABC’s) Memorandum of Incorporation and the implementation of recommendations in the Budgetary Review and Recommendations Report. “I want to appeal to the Committee to give due consideration to the people it appoints to boards. We should appoint people who are well-versed In processes of government and who have a clear understanding of such pieces of legislation as the Public Financial Management Act,” Ms Kubayi said. “We should also consider the issue of the gender ratio and improve on the number of women we appoint. We should try and balance,” she urged. Some people appointed to boards do not know that they have to prepare financial statements for the Minister’s consideration before the Auditor-General (AG) sees them. “If this does not happen, it becomes an audit query for the AG,” she said. The Chairperson of the Committee, Mr Humphrey Maxhegwana, clarified that Parliament needs to finalise the issue of the Chairperson of the board of the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa, as he has been convicted and is awaiting sentencing in April. He said the Committee has taken a collective decision to finalise the matter. “We tabled a report to Parliament, and we need to follow that up so that we close the chapter of the Chairperson. The issue come up during the interviews, that there were allegations pending against the Chair. The situation was explained, hence we proceeded at that point,” he said. Ms Kubayi alerted the Committee that there may be delays in the appointment of senior staff, given the pending reconfiguration of ministries as announced by the President in his State of the Nation Address. Sibongile Maputi
	20 February 2018 The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly.Read more