The Portfolio Committee on Labour on Wednesday questioned why the Labour Activation Programme is only active in two provinces and said it could perform even better on creating employment opportunities. The Labour Activation Programme is run by the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) and is intended to reskill beneficiaries who have lost jobs. The programme is concentrated in Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal. Committee Member Ms Sharome van Schalkwyk commented that it would be beneficial if the Committee was provided with information about jobs created. “The provincial spread is a concern, in that you only doing Gauteng and yet the need is right across the country,” Ms van Schalkwyk said. She also asked why the programme focussed on geyser installation training, if other departments were consulted on the placement of trainees and how other provinces were being assisted. Committee Member Mr Derrick America shared her sentiments. “There is a great need in the Eastern Cape and other provinces as a result of huge unemployment. What is the UIF doing to make it possible for those in rural provinces to be exposed to opportunities?” he asked. A concerted effort is needed to give youth in rural provinces an equal chance in life, Mr America emphasised. The Chairperson of the Committee, Ms Fezeka Loliwe, sought clarity on what the programme was achieving in terms of training. “Your inspectors from the department should jack up their act to make sure that employers do deduct from employers. Gauteng seems to be getting more while it creates more employment opportunities,” Ms Loliwe said. The UIF Commissioner, Mr Teboho Maruping, undertook to look at expanding the programme to other provinces. He said there are opportunities with infrastructure maintenance within the Department of Public Works. The municipalities will also be approached. Sibongile Maputi
	28 February 2018 The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping.Read more