Parliament, Wednesday, 28 February 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Tourism today received a briefing from the National Department of Tourism on its second- and third-quarter performance reports for the 2017/18 year. The committee was generally satisfied with the department’s performance. Whilst the department has been working consistently to meet its targets, as set out in the annual performance plan, the committee notes that the four programmes of the Department are at 89.9% for quarter 2 and 79 % for quarter 3 and 73% on expenditure as at quarter 3. This means that the department has been achieving its target, especially on job creation, which is currently at 2 625 out of a target of 3 085. The Chairperson cautioned the department that, as the financial year end is close, chasing the expenditure trail could result in fiscal dumping. This is not acceptable and the committee urged the department to be vigilant in using its allocated funding to the fullest. One of the challenges that the tourism department faces is the transformation of the sector, particularly for women, and it has been enabling women to become hotel managers in the larger hotel groups through the Executive Development Programme. Of the 20 women trained in the previous financial year, five have been promoted to general managers. This is highly commendable and more will be achieved as 40 women have been enrolled in the programme in the current financial year. With regard to the Blue Flag status of our beaches, 50 beaches are currently on the programme. To achieve this status is difficult as the management of beaches lies with municipalities. However, the department has a programme in place to work with beaches with the potential to reach blue flag status and to further assist those that have lost their status due to the lack of maintenance and compliance with the criteria. The committee commended the department for taking the initiative to ensure that more beaches reach Blue Flag status as these are assets that are enjoyed by both international and domestic tourists and increases our image internationally. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, MS LUSIZO MAKHUBELA-MASHELE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s media officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 4032289
	Cell: 0817041109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Anybody over the age of 18 can participate indirectly in Parliament simply by voting in the elections.Read more