Parliament, Friday, 20 July 2018 – The Chairpersons of Parliament’s Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services and of Police strongly condemn the allegedly racist attack that took place in Middelburg, Mpumalanga, this week, in which a man was beaten to death. Justice and Correctional Services portfolio committee Chairperson Dr Mathole Motshekga expressed his shock at the severity of the assault on Mr Xolisile Ndzongana and his friend‚ Mr Lawrence Nelumoni. “This type of behaviour cannot be condoned, especially not in a democratic country and in a South Africa in which so many lost their lives to ensure black people are treated with dignity and respect and are not discriminated against. We will not stand for this type of criminality. There is no place in our society for those who continue to behave in this fashion.” According to media reports, it took police over a week to arrest the suspects, despite the police knowing details of the attackers. They have now been charged with murder and assault. In footage captured on a CCTV, Mr Ndzongana and Mr Nelumoni are seen driving through the town centre to get home during the early hours of the morning on Sunday, 8 July, when they came across cars blocking Cowen Ntuli Road. The attack is believed to have started begun moments after Mr Ndzongana asked the driver and passengers of one of the cars to move out of the way. The suspects are alleged to have thrown alcohol‚ which they were drinking‚ over Mr Ndzongana and Mr Nelumoni‚ calling them the k-word, before dragging Mr Ndzongana out of the car. When Mr Nelumoni ran to help his friend‚ he too was attacked. It is alleged that despite security guards and police arriving on the scene‚ the alleged attackers were not arrested. The Chairperson of Parliament’s Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman, condemned this. “If this is indeed true, there should be an inquiry as to why it took police so long to act. This is indeed a serious matter; a man lost his life. The South African Police Services (Saps) are there to protect all citizens.” Mr Beukman said he will take up the matter with police management, as such incidents cause the public lose trust in the Saps. The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services has recently been briefed on the Hate Crimes and Hate Speech Bill. However, the committee has called on the Department of Justice to urgently introduce a bill criminalising racism, Dr Motshekga said that hate crimes and hate speech could be a sub-category of the Bill. “Racism was declared a crime against humanity. There is an urgent need to criminalise racism to ensure it is rooted out of our society. We want to create an inclusive society,” he said. “It is time that people realised such behaviour is unacceptable in a democratic order. Citizens need to be protected against elements who think they living in apartheid South Africa,” Dr Motshekga said. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSONS OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, DR MATHOLE MOTSHEKGA, AND THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCIOS BEUKMAN For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party.Read more