Parliament, Wednesday, 18 July 2018 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman, has said that white-collar crime in the financial sector is having a significant negative impact on economic growth and depositors’ confidence in the financial sector. As a result, the portfolio committee will ask for a full briefing on the matter from the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (DPCI/Hawks) when Parliament resumes its sittings in August. Meanwhile, the committee also welcomes the South African Police Service (Saps) specialised units’ recent successes in Middelburg in the fight against rhino poaching. The portfolio committee wishes a speedy recovery to the wounded member of the Saps Special Task Force who was shot during the operation.
	
	Mr Beukman said the incident highlights Saps members’ commitment to dealing with organised crime in the wildlife poaching environment.
	
	The portfolio committee also notes with serious concern the incidents of public unrest in Kimberley and Hermanus. The committee believes that Saps management should deploy the necessary resources and specialised units in the affected communities to ensure that normality is restored.
	
	“Individuals involved in arson, intimidation and public violence should be arrested and brought before the courts,” Mr Beukman emphasised.
	
	The portfolio committee also notes with disappointment the damage to a satellite police station in Kimberley. Mr Beukman said this will have a negative effect on the fight against crime in the area. Communities must ensure that state property does not become the target of criminals.
	
	“The damaging of infrastructure and public buildings in certain communities cannot be tolerated and more targeted visible policing operations should be implemented,” Mr Beukman said.
	
	The portfolio committee will also have a special hearing on the Crime Intelligence Unit’s turnaround strategy, and the ability to detect and prevent community-based crime.
	
	Mr Beukman said it is critical that the authority of the state is maintained. Saps should ensure that the necessary proactive measures are in place to deal with emerging crime trends. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more