Parliament, Wednesday, 25 July 2018 – The Joint Constitutional Review Committee condemns in the strongest possible terms the misleading and incorrect venue information that is doing the rounds for its hearings into a possible amendment of section 25 of the Constitution. The Co-Chairperson of the committee, Mr Vincent Smith, said the committee was made aware by staff of a letter being circulated informing the public that hearings for tomorrow will be held at Greenhills Stadium in Randfontein. The information is printed on a Mogale City Local Municipality letterhead. At this stage, there is no indication that the municipality is involved in the matter, Mr Smith said. “The committee would like to reiterate that it has not changed the venue of any hearings. This [letter] is obviously an attempt to derail the work of the committee and that of Parliament. It is not the first attempt since this process commenced. The intention is clearly to have the public arrive at a wrong venue,” said Mr Smith, who will be leading the delegation in Gauteng. Mr Smith urged the public to only use Parliament’s official communications to ascertain venue details. “We have been communicating the same venues for weeks. At no stage did we change venues, at least not since the hearings commenced toward the end of last month. All the information regarding the venues can be found on Parliament’s website and social media platforms.  The official venues for the Gauteng leg of the hearings are below. TEAM A Members of the media intending to attend the hearings in the Gauteng should please send their details (name, media house and contact details) to bsimons@parliament.gov.za and those who want to attend hearings in the Eastern Cape can contact fndenze@parliament.gov.za. Please find the link for the updated full programme for the public hearings:
	https://tinyurl.com/yb9yvalx. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CO-CHAIRPERSON OF THE JOINT CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE, MR VINCENT SMITH For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”.Read more