Parliament, Tuesday, 3 July 2018 – A delegation of the Joint Constitutional Review Committee held successful public hearings in Mbombela in Mpumalanga and is convinced that the inputs received will strengthen the Committee’s final recommendations to the two houses of Parliament, the National Assembly and National Council of Provinces. Once again, the committee has been astonished by the level of interest in the hearings across the country. The delegation had expected at most 400 people to attend the hearings, but received inputs from well over a thousand participants. The delegation was also very impressed by the content of inputs received. “Once again, the substance of arguments presented was exceptional. With the over 700 000 written submissions we received, some just indicated their support\opposition to the amendment, but the oral submissions have been substantial in content,” said Mr Vincent Smith, the Chairperson of the committee. The committee wishes to reiterate its view that all organised groups are free to participate in the public hearing. “The committee has received a number of question regarding political parties and other formations organising and participating during the hearings. Organised formations in all the guises are societal organisations and are free to participate in the hearings, but ultimately it will be the content of the argument that contributes to the final recommendation,’ Mr Smith emphasised. The delegation welcomes the level of tolerance exhibited by participants in Mbombela. “This was the biggest group and the most disciplined. Everyone was given an opportunity to make their input without intimidation, which is commendable,” Mr Smith said. The delegation will continue with hearings in Ermelo and Middleburg for the two last legs of the Mpumalanga hearings. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CO-CHAIRPERSON OF THE JOINT CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE, MR VINCENT SMITH For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold.Read more