Parliament, Wednesday, 25 July 2018 – Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Health, Ms Lindelwa Dunjwa, has welcomed the fifth South African National HIV Prevalence, Incidence, Behavior and Communication Survey, 2017, conducted by the Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC), which provides information on national progress towards control of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) epidemic. In compiling the report, the HSRC interviewed over 33 000 people about their sexual behaviour and beliefs. Approximately 24 000 people had their blood taken to test for HIV and anti-retroviral (ARV) use. Overall, the survey found that the rate of new HIV infection incidents has declined by 0.48%, indicating 231 100 new HIV infections in South Africa in 2017. Although still high, this is a significant decline from the incidence rate of 0.85% reported in the previous HSRC HIV prevalence report of 2012. The 2017 report further found that the HIV infection rate among young females aged 15 to 24 years old is three times higher than the rate among their male counterparts. Ms Dunjwa said the committee welcomes the response to the epidemic, however, it is concerned about the number of new infections among young females. “I am particularly concerned about the high infection rate amongst young people. Sexual education needs to be intensified and strengthened, to curb the high rate of infections,” said Ms Dunjwa. The committee wishes to see more effort going towards ensuring increased knowledge of sexuality and reproductive health among young people. “Parents, in particular, should play a major role as primary educators about responsible sexual behaviour. We are of the view that education should start at home, which will then filter down to communities and schools,” said Ms Dunjwa. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, MS LINDELWA DUNJWA For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote.Read more