Parliament, Wednesday, 3 July 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Tourism today received a briefing from the National Department of Tourism on the Annual Performance Plan for 2018/19 – 2020/2021. Whilst tourism is a major driver of local economic development and job creation, the committee is pleased to see a target of 4 331 full-time equivalent jobs to be created in this financial year. The committee will be monitoring this target quarter by quarter to ensure that it is realised. The portfolio committee encouraged the Department of Tourism to liaise with other government departments, such as the Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development, to look at promoting tourism within their sectors, thus supporting rural economies. “We would want to see the focus shift towards the development of tourism in villages, townships and small towns, with rural tourism being prioritised and promoted in the next five years,” said the Chairperson of Tourism, Mr Supra Mahumapelo. The department presented its plan on the destination enhancement and route development projects on four priority areas – Port Nolloth to Hondeklipbaai, Sutherland to Carnarvon, Orange River Mouth to Vioolsdrift and Port St Johns to Coffee Bay. The committee also welcomed the development plan for local communities living around five parks, as the assistance provided will enable these communities to become service maintenance entrepreneurs in these parks. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, MR SUPRA MAHUMAPELO. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more