Parliament, Saturday, 28 July 2018 – The Joint Constitutional Review Committee (CRC) will next week wrap up its provincial public hearings with both delegations holding hearings in the Western Cape. The committee also announced a bigger venue for the final day of its hearings. The committee decided to change the venue for the final provincial leg of the public hearings in order to accommodate as many people as possible in one venue. The new venue for the final provincial public hearings programme on Saturday, 4 August 2018, attended by the full committee complement, will now be at the Friends of God Church in Goodwood, Cape Town. On Wednesday, a delegation will start with public hearings in Oudtshoorn before it moves to Beaufort West the next day. The other delegation will hold public hearings in Citrusdal on Thursday and in Swellendam on Friday.
	
	The committee was instructed by the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces to ascertain whether a review of section 25 of the Constitution and other clauses are necessary, to make it possible for the state to expropriate land in the public interest without compensation, and propose the necessary constitutional amendments where necessary. The committee already held hearings in all provinces. Find the programme for the Western Cape below. TEAM A  TEAM B  Members of the media intending to attend the hearings for Team A should please send their details (name, media house and contact details) to razzakani@parliament.gov.za and those who want to attend hearings for Team B can contact ylandu@parliament.gov.za ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CO-CHAIRPERSONS OF THE JOINT CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE, MR VINCENT SMITH AND MR LEWIS NZIMANDE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote.Read more