Parliament, Thursday, 17 May 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Police will have a special hearing on the recent spate of cash-in-transit heists on Wednesday, 13 June 2018. The announcement by the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman, follows the latest incident in Boksburg this morning where a group of heavily armed robbers blew up two cash-in-transit vans. Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police has highlighted that it is unacceptable that the cash-in-transit heists are becoming a normal in our country. These acts of criminality, undertaken using high calibre rifles, must be condemned at all times and society must work with law enforcement agencies to effectively deal with the matter. SAPS management must also strengthen the Crime Intelligence and Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation units to deal with the upsurge from various angles. The matter was raised with the national police management at yesterday’s committee meeting. The Portfolio committee believes that police management should implement short- to medium-term measures to deal with the current crime trend. The cash-in-transit companies must also work hand in glove with SAPS to come up with strategies to effectively deal with the matter. Despite this, the committee welcomes the swift arrest of the perpetrators of the Boksburg heists. “They must be successfully prosecuted and they must receive lengthy sentences in order to use them as examples that lawlessness will never be allowed to reign supreme,” Mr Beukman said. Mr Beukman said they will also invite the major private security companies, Business Against Crime, South African Banking Risk Information Centre (Sabric), Private Security Industry Regulatory Authority and the Private Security Association to the meeting. All role players should ensure that coordination and cooperation is increased to deal with this crime trend. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more