Parliament, Monday, 21 May 2018 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation, Ms Beauty Dlulane, has described the incident that occurred during a SuperSport television broadcast involving Mr Ashwin Willemse, Mr Naas Botha and Mr Nick Mallet as unfortunate and called for a speedy resolution. “The incident is concerning and should be addressed speedily, as it has invoked much emotion. We condemn racism in sport in all its manifestations, as it has the potential to polarise society,” Ms Dlulane said. “South Africans should be circumspect in commenting on this matter, and should allow the investigation to proceed and reach a conclusion. As things are, everyone is venturing an opinion about a matter on which we lack details.” On Saturday, Mr Willemse stated on live television that he will not tolerate being patronised by people who only played rugby during the apartheid era. Before walking off-set, he lamented that he had been categorised as a quota player all his life, when he in fact he had been the best wing of his generation. Ms Dlulane said if indeed it was found that the incident had anything to do with racial discrimination, as Mr Willemse suggested, MultiChoice should do what is necessary as per its code of conduct that regulates the behaviour of guest analysts. Ms Dlulane said South Africans need to accept that differences of opinion during sports analysis is inevitable and is the reason a panel discussion is constituted. “This incident better be about that, and that only,” Ms Dlulane said. She called for restraint, saying that discussion should not be adversarial or be reduced to myopic, racial narratives. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SPORT AND RECREATION, MS BEAUTY DLULANE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8041
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them.Read more