The continued emergence of violence and lack of political tolerance in some African states is a threat to the African Union’s(AU’s) initiative of “Silencing the Guns by 2020”, which is part of the broader continental Agenda 2063, a long-term plan to end hunger, underdevelopment, poverty and all forms of conflict in Africa. Speaking during a recent debate to mark Africa Day, the House Chairperson for International Relations and Intergovernmental Relations in the National Council of Provinces (NCOP), Ms Masefako Dikgale, warned that political intolerance in countries like Zimbabwe, Kenya and Burundi has created an environment in which political debate and dissent are smothered, and this, she said, sows the seeds for future conflict. She said one of the flagship projects and initiatives of the AU is “Silencing the Guns by 2020”, which signals the aspiration for a peaceful and secure Africa as the most urgent priority. “We know achieving this vision is a Herculean task as the scourge of terrorism threatens to cripple the already fragile Somali state, as the Al-Shabaab onslaught continues. Several other African states such as the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Burundi, the Central African Republic and South Sudan remain restive, repeatedly teetering on the precipice of renewed conflict and violence,” said Ms Dikgale. “A further grave concern is the dearth of political tolerance apparent in the domestic politics of several AU member states, the future of the Africa we want is not possible without peace In the document “African Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns by 2020”, the AU emphasise the “need for dialogue-centred conflict prevention, as well as the management and resolution of existing conflicts, with a view to silencing the guns in our continent by the year 2020. “Agenda 2063 provides that in order to achieve sustainable conflict prevention and resolution, a culture of peace and tolerance must be cultivated and nurtured in our children and youth, through peace education,” the AU said in the document, also called the Lusaka Master Roadmap 2016. Agenda 2063 stresses the imperative of ending all wars, civil conflicts, gender-based violence and violent conflicts and prevent genocide, as part of Africa’s collective efforts to silence the guns in the continent by the year 2020. Taking part in the same debate, on the topic “Advancing the Legacy of Nelson Mandela in Building a Better Africa and a Just World”, the Deputy Minister of International Relations and Cooperation Mr Luwellyn Landers, said South Africa will continue playing its part in conflict resolution in the continent, including finding lasting peace in South Sudan and other regions. “South Africa is driven by a vision to create and achieve a continent that is peaceful, democratic, non-racial, non-sexist, united and prosperous, which contributes to a world that is just and equitable “Our commitments and priorities on the African continent remain focused and poised on the strengthening of bilateral relations, the promotion of peace, security and stability, economic cooperation and integration, and the enhancement of the African Agenda 2063,” he said. Deputy Minister Landers added that for Africa to reach its Pan-Africanist political and economic ideals as espoused by its founding fathers, it needs to address a number of historical as well as current challenges which include, among other things, poverty, inequality and unemployment, the rise of extremism and terrorism, conflict and wars. To address these challenges, he said, we remain committed to ensuring peace and stability on our continent though the strengthening of democracy, development, human rights and good governance. We know that there cannot be any economic development without peace and stability. He told NCOP members during the debate to mark Africa Day that after realising the vision of the founders of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) later renamed AU, of ending colonisation, the continent still has a long way to go before reaching the second goal – which is economic emancipation. “The primary agenda of decolonisation has been realised in all of Africa other than Western Sahara, the last colony in Africa which is still colonised by the Kingdom of Morocco. “However, we still have a long way to go in respect of reaching the second goal of Pan-Africanism, which is our continent’s economic emancipation,” said the Deputy Minister. Some of the challenges we are facing as a continent are not of the continent’s own making, but are an inherent consequence of the post-colonial relations between ourselves and the former colonisers. On 25 May 1963, OAU was formed in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, by 32 countries, more countries joined gradually with South Africa becoming the 53rd member in May 1994, after the end of apartheid. In 2002 the organisation was remodelled and renamed AU, in Durban. By Sakhile Mokoena
	30 May 2018 A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa.Read more