Parliament, Wednesday, 23 May 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform today received a briefing from the Ingonyama Trust Board (ITB) on its third-quarter performance for 2017/2018 financial year. Whilst the committee welcomed the report, it is concerned that the ITB’s performance does not correlate to funds spent. Almost 98% of the budget was used to compensate staff and the allocation for goods and services is overspent. The committee asked the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform if the department makes time to read through the ITB’s reports before they are presented to the committee. Committee staff will study all the reports submitted by the ITB over the past 24 months, as the committee believes that the ITB presents the same rhetoric every time about plans for the training of traditional councils, organisational restructuring, and development of policies. The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Phumuzile Ngwenya-Mabila said that the ITB complains about being short of funds and yet they have money remaining. The committee is unhappy with their third-quarter performance and wants to see an improvement. The committee is also not happy with the ITB changing its annual performance plan after they were presented and adopted by the committee. The delays in the finalisation of policy must be addressed. Committee members asked about spending when performance is so poor. Vacant posts are still not filled and some were advertised in November 2017, thus incurring additional costs for re-advertisements. The ITB also overspent on goods and services, yet there is non-performance. The committee was concerned that a decision was taken for ITB to stop converting Permission to Occupy to long-term lease agreements but the advert is still appearing on their website. The committee has advised the department and ITB to further consult with communities living on ITB land on this issue. The ITB informed the committee that it has stopped and apologised for the advert that is still on its website. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM, MS PHUMUZILE NGWENYA-MABILA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2289
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”.Read more