Adaptations will be made to the student-centred model used by the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFS) to allocate and disburse funds, the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training has heard. The Minister of Higher Education and Training, Ms Naledi Pandor, told the committee that she is concerned about the delays in allocating NSFAS funds to institutions. “I am equally concerned about the lack of closure on 2017 challenges. This suggests very serious stystem deficiencies that need to be addressed. These are challenges that should not be repeated in 2019,” Minister Pandor said. “We acknowledge that there are systems problems and a capacity issues within the NSFAS. Interpretation of the model does not include support and collolaboration with universities’ financial-aid offices. There has to be a return to a partnership that ensures that universities are able to assist us,” she said. The student-centred model has been piloted since last year to centralise applications and the disbursements of funds to students. It was primarily meant to curb inefficiencies in the system and move away from a hard-copy application process. Minister Pandor said it was peculiar that universities do not know which students need funding and that they could not produce data on these students. She said the department will work hard to ensure that a new system works for young people. Chief Executive for Universities SA, Professor Ahmed Bawa, said leadership turnover at NSFAS and the strike at the beginning of the year did not help. “The student-centred model does not work for the students. Clearly, it isn’t student-centred. We can’t have a situation where students wait for over five months to get their funding; they suffer by not having their meal and book allowances,” Prof Bawa said. He said the student-centred model should be made to work, but if this is not possible, a new redesigned finanical-aid system should be devised. “Ultimately, it is about the students. We have to work together. We need different approaches in dealing with these issues going into next year,” Prof Bawa said. Minister Pandor also told the committee that she had intervened in the matters plaguing the University of Zululand, as per the committee’s recommendation. She said the outcome of the forensic investigations into the university will be shared with the committee once it is finalised. The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Connie September said the committee is pleased with the interventions at the University of Zululand and encouraged the Minister to do all in her power so that students’ futures are secure. “We shoud get the institution working,” she said. Sibongile Maputi
	30 May 2018 A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more