A water policy debate was held at the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) yesterday evening, giving the new Minister of Water and Sanitation, Mr Gugile Nkwinti, an opportunity to outline a new turn-around strategy to ensure that water and sanitation are delivered to the people. But the debate was dogged by allegations of bad financial management that has driven the department to bankruptcy under the leadership of the previous minister. The new minister stated outright that he has inherited a department beset by challenges arising from wasteful and fruitless expenditures. To stop the rot, he has now introduced a strategy that is firmly based on five pillars to ensure that his department restores effective governance and its responsibility as a custodian of South Africa’s water resources. “We have incepted the National Water Service Regulator and a Value Chain, a Master Plan, Institutionalised Alignment Control and Management.” The minister said they have also streamlined the organogram of the department to ensure it is easy to manage. “There is a challenge posed by not having a hierarchy, which has led to a lack of clear accountability. As a result, we have now appointed a Chief Operations Officer, and we have now the planning, monitoring and evaluation unit within the department. This in addition to the integrated financial governance approach we have now adopted.” But serious budgetary challenges still exist. “There are still historical contracts and accruals to be honoured, and wasteful and irregular expenditures which have to be borne by the current department budget of 15.5 billion.” We will nonetheless ensure that our current budget advances the notion of a developmental state, he said. “In achieving that we will involve people in formulating our policies, in monitoring and evaluating our performance.” It is not whether we want to support this budget or not, we have no choice because water is a basic human dignity, said the Chairperson of the Select Committee on Social Development, Ms Landulile Dlamini. “We support this budget because we have a social contact with our people. Not to support it is tantamount to betrayal.” We are pleased that the new minister has come up with a new turn-around strategy that is in line with the National Development Plan (NDP), she said. “The NDP identifies access to water and sanitation as a contributory factor to socio-economic development.” The Chairperson congratulated the department on its role in developing water artisans, 148 000 of which have gained employment and contributed to our country’s economic development. The review of the Water Act and Water Service Act to contribute to the formulation of a single water policy framework is commendable, she said. “We are glad to hear that you concede that you inherited a department that is wracked with bankruptcy, said Ms Thandi Mpambo-Sibhukwana of the Democratic Alliance. “In this house, I asked the previous minister whether the department was bankrupt or not; she denied that. We now know that the department has experienced wasteful and irregular expenditures running into billions. As a result, the department has failed to meet its strategic goals under her leadership.” The minister has not suspended any official in the department for all these wrong doings, which means he has failed to reassure us that he is serious about dealing with financial irregularities in the department, said the Economic Freedom Fighters’ Ms Delisile Ngwenya. The future of water sustainability needs bold leadership, she said. South Africa needs to embark on desalination of sea water to increase our water resources, she said. “But before we do that, we need to ensure that we stop water leaks.” It is sad to realise that R1.5 billion of the R5.5 billion of the department’s budget will have to service an overdraft from irregular expenditures and financial mismanagement, said Mr Mntomuhle Khawula of the Inkatha Freedom Party. “The R1.5 billion is a huge chunk of this department’s budget that should have been utilised to provide water services to those who are deprived of water and sanitation.” Abel Mputing
	31 May 2018 Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more