Parliament, Tuesday, 8 May 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries today received a briefing from the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF) on the draft national Policy on Comprehensive Producer Development Support. The policy objectives are: to define and standardise the categories of producers in the agriculture, forestry and fisheries sector; to establish a comprehensive electronic register of producers that will serve as a prerequisite for accessing support from government; and to strengthen institutional mechanisms to better coordinate support provided to the sector to avoid competition and unnecessary duplication. The committee welcomed the long-outstanding policy, which will ensure that women, youth and the disabled (who are the most vulnerable) are able to access the 50% of funds allocated for them to develop in the sector, but is disappointed with the department’s speed in finalising it. On behalf of the committee, the Chairperson, Ms Rosina Machwene Semenya, said: “The department must fast-track this policy and finalise it before we close this term as the fifth Parliament. In the new term, this policy must be implemented. The Department must ensure that all stakeholders are consulted.” The meeting was attended by representatives of the following organisations: the African Farmers Association of South Africa, the Food and Allied Workers Union, the National African Farmers Union and Forestry Community Forums. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES, MS ROSINA MACHWENE SEMENYA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2289
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process.Read more