Parliament, Wednesday, 2 May 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Social Development today got presentations from the Department of Social Development and its entities, the National Development Agency (NDA) and the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) on their strategic and annual performance plans and their budgets for 2018/19 financial year. The presentations were led by the Minister of Social Development Ms Susan Shabangu. In introducing the presentations, Ms Shabangu highlighted all the challenges that are facing the department and shared the vision of the department with the committee. The Chairperson of the committee Ms Rosemary Capa said the committee is happy with the manner in which the department and its entities presented their strategic and performance plans and budgets for 2018/19 financial year. “We were delighted to hear the quality of the presentations and the manner in which the minister shared the vision of the department which is in line with the new dawn promised by President Cyril Ramaphosa in his State of the Nation Address. Above all we are delighted to hear the minister assuring the committee for taking the department from where it is to new heights” said Ms Capa. The minister told the committee about the steps that are taken to stabilise the administration of the department and its entities. The steps include filling of senior management vacancies that have been vacant for a long time. “The minister told us that interviews have taken place and the processes for filling the vacancies are underway” said Ms Capa. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT, MS ROSEMARY CAPA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mava Lukani (Mr) 
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 5031840
	E-mail: mlukani@parliament.gov.za The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”.Read more