During the month of June, South Africa commemorates the contribution of the youth in the struggle for liberation which included the fight against Bantu Education that resulted in the Soweto Uprising, which started on 16 June 1976, where young Hector Petersen was killed by apartheid police during a student march against the introduction of Afrikaans as a medium of instruction in schools. Since that fateful day, June 16 has been commemorated every year as Soweto Day, and after 1994 the democratic government declared it a national holiday and renamed it Youth Day. To mark this day, the National Assembly held a debate on the topic “Live the legacy: towards a socio-economically empowered youth”. The discussion was opened by African National Congress Member of Parliament, Mr Gijimani Skosana, with a call for the “nation to value the contribution of young people in our struggle”. He said the country should improve the quality of the lives of young people through education and skills development. “Education is a basic human right and has been made an apex priority by the ANC, education is pivotal for economic prosperity, assisting South Africans to escape the “poverty trap” characterising many of our communities. “It has also to reach beyond economic goals, enabling South Africans to improve the quality of their lives and contribute to a peaceful and democratic nation,” said Mr Skosana. He added that his party, in its policies, has consistently committed itself to an integrated education and training system that, among other things, pursues skills development as a tool to develop the people and contribute to the economic development of the country. “Education and skills development are fundamental requirements for creating a prosperous society, economic development requires various skills and South Africa needs more artisans. That is why we encourage the youth to look beyond our universities and into TVET colleges,” he said. Mr Sibusiso Mncwabe of the National Freedom Party raised a concern about the very high rate of youth unemployment and the fact that qualified young graduates were also struggling to find employment. He called this a ticking time bomb of social discontent which required drastic intervention in order to build a strong nation. “Any society that condones such exclusion of its youth from the mainstream economy is bound to head for civil strife and social upheaval. This trend is not only unacceptable, but it is also extremely dangerous,” said Mr Mncwabe. Other Members of the National Assembly said the high rate of unemployment among young people contributed to the abuse of drugs and alcohol by dispirited youth. Mr Steve Swart of the ACDP said: “As we remember the 1976 Uprising, we acknowledge that the struggle then was not just about education, but it was about the future. It is appropriate to evaluate today how far we as a nation have progressed in advancing the interests of our youth, this is important because our youth hold the key to the future of our country.” Democratic Alliance MP Mr Yusuf Cassim said: “A struggle for a free and fair society, one where every child has equality of opportunity in one South Africa for all, is a struggle that will make or break our nation.” By Sakhile Mokoena 29 May 2018 Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them.Read more