Political parties represented in the National Assembly used the recent debate of the Presidency’s budget vote, to assess President Cyril Ramaphosa’s performance since his election to the highest office, just over three months ago. The President’s speech was followed by a lengthy debate that continued into the early hours of the evening yesterday with high level deliberations, at times heated, about government decisions and plans announced by President Ramaphosa. The African National Congress Chief Whip Mr Jackson Mthembu commended the Presidency for “leading by example in applying cost cutting measures”. “Much has been done by the Presidency to reduce costs by, reducing overseas trips delegations and encouraging more use of teleconference facilities. Mr Mthembu welcomed the announcement of the establishment of a commission of enquiry into tax administration and governance, saying this and other corrective measures taken by the President Ramaphosa will help in improving state capacity and restore public confidence. “As part of measures to stabilise governance and stabilise the financial performance of State-owned enterprises, we welcome the recent reviews in the appointment of boards, the political will to deal corruption in this new dawn has boosted public confidence,” said Mr Mthembu. He told Mr Ramaphosa that the ruling party hoped that the planned investment conference will not be a talk shop, but a serious investment boost for our economy Mr Mthembu urged Mr Ramaphosa to act decisively on ending wasteful expenditure in government, and that all those found to be involved in state capture must face the necessary consequences including jail and paying back the money. The Leader of the Democratic Alliance Mr Mmusi Maimane also reiterated the call for President Ramaphosa to deal decisively with state capture and start building a state that is corruption free. While he welcomed the appointment of new boards in a number of SOEs, Mr Maimane said that was not enough, he proposed that some of the troubled state companies like the South African Airways must be sold. He said the country needs deep political and sweeping economic reform, warning that without any real change South Africa will be left behind in global developments. “We need a political system in which people expressed their choices trough their ideals and not their races, we need comprehensive economic reform – time will tell if we have a President who can deliver real change,” said Mr Maimane. He called on President Ramaphosa to act on the promise he made when he announced Cabinet  reshuffles, that the size and reconfiguration of the executive will be reviewed. Also echoing that call the leader of the Economic Freedom Fighters Mr Julius Malema said reducing the size of the cabinet will save the government a lot of money which can be redirected to needy departments for service delivery. “You promised a job summit nothing has happened despite growing calls that young people are not working they need jobs. You have postposed investment conference instead appointed an investment convoy, which we have no hope in, we feel we going back to the 1996 class policy which failed. “You promised a comprehensive package for women and girls, we have not seen anything, instead they are getting killed, men have declared war against women and there is no clear plan from government to curb this attack on women,” said Mr Malema. Inkatha Freedom Party Leader Inkosi Mangosuthu Buthelezi, repeated his call for the establishment of a parliamentary committee to conduct oversight over the Presidency, saying without such a committee MPs would not have the privilege to interrogate the budget of the Presidency. “As I have said many times before, this is neither fair on the President nor conducive to our work as Members of Parliament. Considering the number of Constitutional Court rulings on the centrality of parliamentary oversight, we cannot afford to keep ignoring this shortcoming”, he said Inkosi Buthelezi said this must be finalised in the Rules Committee so that the officials in the Presidency can be interrogated by an oversight committee like any other government officials. By Sakhile Mokoena 24 May 2018 Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs.Read more