Parliament, Monday, 28 May 2018 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman, highlighted this morning the need for the South African Police Service (Saps) management to deploy more specialised units to deal with taxi violence and the current scourge of cash-in-transit heists. The Saps Task Team, Tactical Response Team and National Intervention Unit should be strategically deployed to ensure that the increase in taxi violence and cash-in-transit heists is dealt with comprehensively. Close cooperation and collaboration between the Saps and security companies is also of vital importance. “The killing of an innocent school learner in KwaZulu-Natal in the cross-fire of a botched hijacking this morning is an indication that unconventional and extraordinary steps are required from law-enforcement agencies to deal with the current situation,” Mr Beukman said. The Portfolio Committee on Police conveys its sincere condolences to the bereaved family and community members. “The murders over the weekend in Cape Town are worrying in the context of the high number of commuters that use taxis daily. The lives of the majority of our people are put at risk as a result of these apparent disagreements within the associations,” Mr Beukman said. “More crime intelligence assets should be allocated to those industries being held ransom by a small band of well-armed and resourced criminal syndicates. The National Development Plan is very clear that technology should be used optimally by the police service to deal with crime effectively,” he said. Mr Beukman also called on members of the public who may have information about the actions of criminal syndicates to contact their nearest police station or submit the information to the toll-free crime line, as this is key to combatting crime in South Africa. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”.Read more