The Minister of Science and Technology, Ms Mamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane, announced at the recent delivery of the budget vote for the Department of Science and Technology that the Meerkat/Square Kilometre Array (SKA) project is complete. The completion of the design and construction of the 64-dish MeerKAT radio telescope at a cost of R3,2 billion, “exactly the cost predicted in 2007/08”, was done within schedule and within budget, a feat seldom accomplished in the construction and engineering industry. The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology visited the site, 90 kilometres from Carnavon in the Northern Cape. A collaboration between 10 countries and several scientists and engineers built the full array of MeerKAT antennas. The 64 dishes, each 13.5 metres in diameter, 19.5 metres high and weighing 42 tons, are distributed across 8 kilometres, stand tall and majestic in the Karoo. Minister Kubayi-Ngubane said expenditure on the SKA project to date is R4,4 billion. This includes MeerKAT expenditure, land acquisition, resurfacing 80 kilometres of road to the site, construction of 110 kilometres of power lines and the MeerKAT data centre, as well as the precursor Karoo Array Telescope and human capital development for the wider SKA project. The impact on the Northern Cape can be seen in local economic development and training of suppliers and members of the community. Artisans and technicians were sourced from the pool of young people available in the community. Both libraries in Carnavon receive internet connection from the South African Radio Astronomy Observatory. The local high school has benefitted by being capacitated with trained teachers in maths and science. The SKA is growing its own timber by upskilling primary school learners and by providing bursaries to high school learners for science-related courses. Last year for the first time five learners went to university, fully paid for by SKA.
	
	In her reflections after a walkabout around the Big Data Storage, Meerkat, SKA and Hydrogen Epoch of Reionisation Array radio telescope (Hera), the Chairperson of the Committee, Ms Lindiwe Maseko, said: “Now we can see the benefits of investing in this project. Over 7 000 job opportunities were conceived in creating the world’s most advanced telescope, which will inform us about what is happening in space. We have been told that the first light image taken by the Meerkat shows more than 1 300 galaxies compared to the 70 known in this particular location in space prior to Meerkat. “This has put South Africa in the forefront in the astronomy sphere worldwide allowing us to become a leader. South Africa is playing a leading role in the establishment of the SKA Inter-Governmental Organisation and will be a founding member.” The site in remote Losberg in Northern Cape has been declared a national key point to protect South Africa’s investment. Sureshinee Govender
	28 May 2018 Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them.Read more