Parliament, Tuesday, 29 May 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs has resolved to reschedule an item on the naturalisation of the Gupta Family to tomorrow (30 May 2018) due to time constraints. The Committee was scheduled to receive a detailed report from the Parliamentary Legal Services on the initial information they have gathered and whether there are grounds to institute a full inquiry into the matter. The committee remains committed to seeing the matter to conclusion as per the directive given by the House Chairperson responsible for committees. The committee wants to interrogate the matter thoroughly hence the need to give the item adequate time for a proper consideration. On election readiness, the committee welcomes progress in relation to preparations for the upcoming National and Provincial elections but has emphasised the need for the Municipal Demarcation Board to conclude their process of demarcation of municipal boundaries to enable the Commission to conclude its preparations. The committee remains confident that the Electoral Commission of South Africa remains a credible body to deliver free and fair elections which is a pillar of South Africa’s fledgling democracy. The progress in updating addresses on the voters’ roll is also commendable but more efforts must be made to capture all addresses as directed by the Constitutional Court ruling. The committee is aware of the acute fiscal constraints that affect not only the IEC but government in general, but has emphasised the need for the Commission to plan better to ensure that the little they have is spend optimally. The committee stressed the call it made earlier this year for eligible voters to register to vote and also to update their addresses on the voters’ roll. The IEC has made plans for a second registration weekend and will confirm the dates. “People must take this opportunity to register so that their voices are heard,” said Mr Donald Gumede, the Chairperson of the Committee. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING-CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, MR DONALD GUMEDE For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees.Read more