Parliament, Tuesday, 15 May 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services and the Portfolio Committee on Police have noted with grave concern the politically motivated killings in KwaZulu-Natal. Both committees have expressed shock at the criminality and said the senseless killings last week of two members of the African National Congress (ANC) and one member of the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) must be condemned in the strongest possible terms. The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman, called on the police to thoroughly investigate these murders and to bring to book those responsible. “People cannot die because of their political beliefs or affiliations. This cannot be allowed to continue in a democratic dispensation,” said Mr Beukman. Dr Mathole Motshekga, the Chairperson of the Justice and Correctional Services Portfolio Committee, added his voice to the condemnation, saying that the criminal justice system must leave no stone unturned to protect South Africans’ right to political association. “Once these thugs are apprehended and brought before a court of law, the justice system must deal with them decisively and speedily. Harsh sentences should be meted out as a deterrent for those contemplating similar action.” The chairpersons said legislation passed at parliamentary level must be used effectively by law-enforcement agencies to ensure that the constitutional and legislative rights of citizens are protected at all times. “In the run-up to next year’s general elections, we call on all the authorities to work closely together to ensure intimidation of this kind does not occur or increase,” said Dr Motshekga. In the normal course of their oversight work, the committees will request law-enforcement agencies to present their reports and planned action to curb politically motivated murders in South Africa, especially in KwaZulu-Natal. ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSONS OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, DR MATHOLE MOTSHEKGA, AND THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more