The second reading of the Basic Conditions of Employment Amendment Bill, Labour Relations Amendment Bill and National Minimum Wage Bill came before Parliament for debate. Of all, it is the latter that took centre stage and stirred emotions. Ever since its introduction, it has been accepted with a sense of great achievement and dismay by both its detractors and those who support its founding principle. In her debate, the Minister of Labour Ms Mildred Oliphant, stated that the inception of the National Minimum Wage Bill was a milestone to address the wage inequalities that our country is currently faced with. She said this was achieved through a social partnership with stakeholders involved in the labour market. “This is a product of these social partners. This included public participation and this has shown that democracy is alive and we should be proud of that.” It’s normal that there will be disagreement at times. But there will be a National Minimum Wage Commission that will make an annual adjustment determination. We have now joined other countries that use such a Bill as an instrument of economic and social development. “But there will be flexibility to those businesses that cannot afford the stipulations of the Bill, and such businesses will be exempted. There is a practical experience to this effect to show that this can work.” She stated that the amendments to the Labour Relations sought to regulate and curb violent and protracted strikes. “This will ensure that there is a labour market stability.” She said these amendments sought to ensure that the wealth gap between those who are creators of wealth and the disadvantaged is decreased. “These amendments may be seen as small steps, but they are steps in the right direction.” There are allegations that the passing of the National Minimum Wage Bill was rushed, said the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Labour, Ms Sharome van Schalkwyk. “We are not rushing this Bill; our interest is to see the betterment of the wages of our people as a priority. The sooner, the better.” This wage bill will ensure that the outcry of those whose rights continue to be violated by employers. One farm worker alleged. “You are work yourself to death and not paid accordingly. What we getting now is the modern day slavery wage.” This bill may not be a living wage, but it will improve the living condition of well over 6.6 million workers that are currently earning below the current National Minimum Wage, she said. There is an undue desperate haste to cover the dire consequences of this bill, said Mr Michael Bagraim. The reality is that our country is faced with the greatest problem facing our country, he said. “Our unemployment rate puts pressure on our welfare system as a whole. And now business has stopped recruiting because of this imminent bill.” We supported the introduction of this bill based on the motivation that it would deal with 100 years of institutionalised slave wage, said Mr Thembinkosi Rawula. But as it now stands, we don’t support the R20 per day proposal, he said. “As it is now, this Bill is in favour of big business and the new dawn is a reversal of the gains of workers in favour of big business.” This Wage Bill is not sustainable and affordable, said Mr IFP. “As it is now this Bill will cripple the economy. Small businesses will soon close shop. They will not be able to employ job seekers in the future.” This Wage Bill has been successfully implemented in various countries, said Mr Nhlanhlakayise Khubisa. But the R20 proposal is not enough, he said. But many workers are not aware of the objective of this Bill, he added. “One domestic worker claimed that she is paid R1 500 a month and she gets groceries at the end of the year and she is satisfied with that. Domestic workers need to be educated, many are still exploited and are not paid a decent living wage.” This Wage Bill seeks to ensure that there is a realisation of economic emancipation stipulated in our Constitution, but it is not a panacea for the challenges that we are faced with, said Mr William Madisha. We are still faced with a situation of foreign workers in restaurants who are not paid even a minimum wage, he added. “Most of them are given tips as salaries. This shows the high inequality that still exists in our labour market.” We cannot allow the government to curb workers’ right to strike, as proposed by the Labour Relations Amendment Bill, said Ms Cynthia Majeke. As this Bill stands, workers’ rights will be infringed by the bosses and they would interdict workers to stop strikes and cripple the unity of workers. By Abel Mputing
	30 May 2018 The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party.Read more