Parliament, Tuesday, 30 October 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs has called for further engagements between Fireblade Aviation and the Department of Home Affairs (DHA) aimed at formalising the operation of the private terminal at OR Tambo as directed by the courts. The committee met the owners of Fireblade Aviation who detailed the process they have followed in getting approvals to have the terminal operational. Following its oversight visit to the terminal in August, the committee had highlighted its discontent with the information that the operation had not been solidified with a signed agreement. The written agreement must delineate the financing of state departments that are offering services at ports of entry as required by legislative framework governing entry and departures from South Africa. “It is unacceptable that the state currently offers a service to private clients at undefined cost. Also, it is unacceptable that the meagre amount being paid by Fireblade only goes to DHA and there is no clear standard on how this amount was arrived at,” the Chairperson of the committee, Mr Hlomani Chauke, emphasised. The committee remains concerned that line departments currently have to divert staff from OR Tambo International Airport to the private terminal when required. This happens despite the shortage of human capital to service high volumes at OR Tambo. The committee resolved to call the Minister and Senior Management of the Department of Home Affairs to clarify why there is no written agreement between the department and Fireblade since the court ruling in January 2018. Also, the department must clarify what the R117 000 that Fireblade is paying to the department is for, and how the amount was reached. Meanwhile, the committee condemns in the strongest terms the violent acts of protest by Black First Land First in its meeting today. It is uncalled for for any protester to threaten to harm anyone and disrupt the work of a committee. The right to protest is enshrined in the Constitution and Parliament respects and endeavours to promote those rights. However, these rights have certain responsibilities attached to them, that must be respected at all times. It is also concerning that this is not the first time that Black First Land First has protested in breach of protocols and parliamentary rules. In May 2017 a similar incident happened during a joint meeting of the Standing Committee on Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, In line with Parliament’s ethos of being a People’s Parliament, committees are and will remain open to the public to observe the work done there by their elected representatives. The Chairperson of the Committee will inform the Office of the Speaker of the occurrences today, with the aim of preventing any future recurrences. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, MR HLOMANI CHAUKE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote.Read more