Parliament, Tuesday, 16 October 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services today received a briefing from the Office of the Chief Justice (OCJ) and Legal Aid South Africa on their annual reports.
	
	The committee Chairperson, Ms Madipoane Refiloe Moremadi Mothapo, commended the OCJ for receiving an unqualified audit with no findings in the third financial year of its existence. In the 2015/16 and 2016/17 financial years, the OCJ received an unqualified audit opinion with findings from the Auditor-General.
	
	The OCJ had 19 targets for the 2017/18 financial year and achieved 100% of those targets. The committee heard some of the OCJ's key achievements are the operationalisation of the Limpopo High Court, the launch of new websites for the Constitutional Court and the OCJ to improve public access, filling 95.4% of funded vacant posts and development of an information security framework. The committee heard some concerns with compliance monitoring, information technology systems control and supply chain management, which are currently receiving attention. Ms Mothapo encouraged the OCJ to sustain the clean audit and good performance so that it continues on this trajectory in the next financial year. The committee commended Legal Aid South Africa for receiving its 17th consecutive unqualified audit without matters. It was voted employer of choice in the public sector for the ninth year in a row. Legal Aid South Africa appealed to the committee for assistance in reversing cuts in its grants from government. If this trend continues, Legal Aid South Africa will have to retrench staff by 2019/20. This will impact on service delivery to indigent South Africans who are completely reliant on their services. This could also lead to an increase in the backlog of court cases due to the non-availability of legal aid personnel. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, MS MADIPOANE REFILOE MOREMADI MOTHAPO. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)Tel: 021 403 8437Cell: 081 703 9542E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society.Read more