Parliament, Friday, 5 October 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Police has placed on record that effective consequence management and constant vetting should form the basis of any measures to deal with members of the South African Police Service (SAPS) who act in contravention of the laws of the country. This after the Minister of Police mentioned in his reply to a parliamentary question early this week that 1 172 police members were convicted for various crimes in the last five years. The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Francois Beukman, said the committee supports a zero tolerance policy with regard to criminal behaviour and conduct by SAPS members. “Members who are found guilty of criminal conduct should exit the service on an immediate basis. The public requires professional police members who act with integrity and act within the law,” said Mr Beukman. The committee strongly believes that through recruitment methodology, as well as career incident and consequent management, the police management should be able to weed out individuals with criminal tendencies. The committee also believes that the current situation, whereby corrupt and criminal members emerge within the police service, can be turned around by implementing in full the recommendations of the National Development Plan with regard to the code of conduct of SAPS and the National Police Board. The board will set standards for entrance of recruits and criteria for promotion. Mr Beukman said the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation, together with the Independent Police Investigative Directorate, should step up their efforts to investigate criminal conduct of SAPS members who acted outside the law. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote.Read more