Parliament, Wednesday, 24 October 2018 – This week, the Portfolio Committee on Energy continued its public hearings on the Draft Integrated Resource Plan (IRP 2018) for electricity. Stakeholders in the energy sector and environmental lobby groups made submissions, while the Chairperson of the portfolio committee, Mr Fikile Majola, also gave an opportunity to the public to make oral submissions. Members of the public complained that the public participation process would be more effective if the public hearings went to the communities affected by high levels of carbon emissions as a result of coal mining. They were also opposed to the inclusion of more coal-fired powered stations in the Draft IRP, because of the harmful effects coal has on people’s health and livelihoods. Submissions called for government to look at renewable energy, which is cleaner and environment-friendly. Members of the public said they have seen the effects of mining on communities and the environment. Even worse, is that mining companies often do not rehabilitate mines when they leave, while communities living nearby are under-developed and poverty-stricken. Members of the public were also concerned about the environmental impact of coal mining and its effect on climate change. They called for environmental regulation and legislation, and for government to move away from fossil fuels. Whilst the majority of the submissions dispute the inclusion of coal and nuclear power in the IRP, others believe that coal is abundant in South Africa and we should use what we have. A similar argument was put forward in support of the nuclear industry. Throughout the presentations and discussions, the need for a Just Energy Transition (JET) Plan became apparent, or at a least a broader engagement on the concept of JET. Comments received expressed concern on the high cost of electricity and said that the Draft IRP fails to address the problem. The Department of Energy was criticised for the technical language of the Draft IRP document, with the public calling for a more accessible document. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, MR FIKILE MAJOLA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa LanduParliamentary Communication ServicesTel: 021 403 8203Cell: 081 497 4694E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”.Read more