Parliament, Friday, 26 October 2018 – This week, the Portfolio Committee on Energy concluded its public hearings on the Draft Integrated Resource Plan (IRP 2018) for electricity. The Chairperson for the portfolio committee, Mr Fikile Majola, said all inputs will be taken into consideration when the committee undertakes to draft its report with recommendations. Briefing the committee, the South African Local Government Association (Salga) said it is of the view that the demand forecast in the Draft IRP is unrealistic. Since 2007, the electricity supplied from Eskom’s grid to municipalities has not increased, thus there is no justification for high-demand forecasts. The South African Wind Energy Association (SAWEA) said the Draft IRP update should be adjusted to smooth out and accelerate procurement of wind and photovoltaic (PV) energy allocations of at least 1GW per annum between 2021 and 20130, so that the market risks associated with stop-start procurement are minimised. SAWEA called upon the committee to reconsider coal-related investment costs, particularly those associated with the climate policy. Just Energy Future Campaign said it welcomed the opportunity to make a submission, but warned that the process should not be merely an academic exercise, as the Draft IRP has implications for people on the ground, especially women. The National Society of Black Engineers stated that an assessment of the socio-economic impacts of the proposals in the IRP has been insufficient. The final IRP needs to re-look at the section on risk analysis. The National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE) of South Africa believes that the Draft IRP must be amended, as it will negatively impact on its members and families. The Draft IRP will lead to job losses and government needs to find a way to preserve high-quality jobs. The IRP will also compromise supply security. NSBE said engineers have recommended 75% baseload coal, nuclear and solar. The NSBE is not against renewable energy, but Eskom continues to control the electricity-supply industry, while independent power producers control less or 30% of the industry. On Tuesday, 30 October, the committee will have a roundtable discussion on the Draft IRP. Mr Majola said the decision to host a roundtable discussion is informed by the submissions received during the public hearings. The Department of Energy, Eskom and Salga have been invited to participate. Stakeholders in the energy sector and environmental lobby groups will form part of the roundtable. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, MR FIKILE MAJOLA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more