Parliament, Wednesday, 24 October 2018 –The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman, has called on all law abiding South Africans to condemn the criminal onslaught on police members. He was responding to yesterday’s incident in New Brighton, Port Elizabeth, in which a police captain was gunned down. He expressed condolences with the South African Police Services (Saps) and the next of kin of the murdered officer, and called on the national management of the (Saps) to continue to prioritise the safety of both the police who protect us and citizens. “This brazen attack by criminals on law enforcement officials highlights the danger that Saps members face in the execution of their duties. Therefore, all the necessary resources should be mobilised to apprehend the perpetrators,” said Mr Beukman. In addition, Mr Beukman said the committee has received a number of written submissions from members of the public with regard to a dated draft departmental document with no legal status on private ownership of fire-arms and the matter of self-defence. “It was unfortunate that the draft document was presented by some role players as an official document that is currently with Parliament. This false narrative has led to the fuelling of unwarranted fears and emotions that could have been avoided. We can place it on record that there is no official referral from the Executive before the committee,” said Mr Beukman. He reiterated that role players and firearm owners should await the official tabling of the relevant legislation once it is finalised by the Executive. On the VBS mutual bank matter, Mr Beukman said that the management of the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (Hawks) should ensure that the necessary resources is availed to strengthen the investigations. He has acknowledged the high expectations from various sectors in society that law enforcement agencies deal effectively with white collar crime. During the month of November the committee expects the HAWKS to update them on high profile cases currently being investigated. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact Committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion.Read more