Parliament, Sunday, 07 October 2018 –The Portfolio Committee on Police will this coming week conduct public hearings in Parliament on the audit outcomes of departments that the committee oversees. They include the South African Police Service (SAPS), Independent Police Investigative Directorate (IPID) and the Civilian Secretariat for Police (CSP). The Chairperson of the committee, Mr Francois Beukman, said that the 2017/18 reports from the Auditor-General is an important indicator of the overall financial and performance management of government departments. He said that the committee welcomes the clean audit opinion of the Civilian Secretariat for Police as the best performer within the portfolio. “We acknowledge the pro-active measures that the CSP took to ensure a turnaround in their financial management. On the other side, we are not satisfied with the status of audit plans and usefulness of performance indicators of some of the departments,” said Mr Beukman. About the SAPS, Mr Beukman said much more still need to be done by the Accounting Officer to improve internal controls and compliance with consequence management legislation. He said that compliance with supply chain prescripts and plans to detect fraud is weak and should be addressed. “It is critical for departments to develop comprehensive action plans to deal with differences that were identified by the Auditor-General. Audit committees of departments should also ensure strict monitoring of departmental plans to improve audit outcomes,” he said. At the end of the public hearing, the committee will compile firm recommendations that will be sent to the National Assembly for adoption. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact committee’s media officer: Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year.Read more