Parliament, Wednesday, 17 October 2018 – A delegation of the Ad Hoc Committee to Inquire into the Intervention in the North West Provincial Government in terms of section 100 of the Constitution is alarmed by admissions of lack of cooperation and coordination between the district and local municipalities under its jurisdiction. This admission of lack of cooperation was made by the North West MEC for Local Government and Human Settlements who told the Ad Hoc Committee that Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipality and local municipalities under its jurisdiction were not pulling towards the same direction to address service delivery challenges in the district. “According to the report that we got, there is a problem of coordination between the district and a number of local municipalities. This lack of cooperation concerns us as the Ad Hoc Committee because it compromises service delivery. The District and Local Municipalities should be working together seamlessly to deliver quality services,” said the leader of the delegation visiting Mahikeng, Mr Jomo Nyambi. The Ad Hoc Committee is in the North West province to undertake oversight visits to ascertain if there is a need for the intervention as required by Section 100 (2) (b) of the Constitution. The lack of cooperation was evident when the delegation visited the Lichtenburg Waste Water Treatment Plant and found the facility partly operational leading to spillages into the ecosystem. The delegation raised concerns around the lack of tools of trade for employees working at the plant as well as lack of adequate skills to run the plant. The delegation also raised concerned about the insufficient budget for the operation and maintenance of the plant. “The issue of inadequate maintenance, the issue of insufficient security and the issues of workers not getting the necessary equipment that will enable them to be effective and work properly are a concern for us,” said Mr Nyambi, who is also the House Chairperson for Committees, Oversight and Intergovernmental Relations in the National Council of Provinces. The delegation commends the South African National Defence Force’s implementation of Operation Prosper, despite its own funding challenges, to assist the municipality as it seeks to stabilize its sanitation programme. The delegation has requested a full report on the work that was supposed to be done by Sedibeng Water Board within the municipality as per the signed Service Level Agreement, whose implementation is in serious doubt. Meanwhile, the Committee also visited the Department of Social Development provincial head office in Mahikeng where non-compliance with Occupational Health and Safety requirements resulted in the department's employees engaging in a strike action. The Ad Hoc Committee was told that the bulk of the problems workers complained about remained unresolved. Some of the reasons for the slow pace of the resolution of the dispute with the union includes the fact that all senior managers are acting – with the current Head of Department acting since 01 October after her predecessor retired. The building that the department occupies is a major cause for the friction with the workers as it does not meet the safety requirements. Despite sending the landlord various letters demanding that he resolves the safety concerns he has allegedly ignored these letters. The delegation raised concern that the department has not followed the necessary laws available to them to ensure that they enforce compliance by the landlord as this affects the working conditions of the staff and service delivery by the department. The HOD was given until 12 noon today to provide the Committee with a full report outlining all steps taken to address all the challenges that have impacted on service delivery by the department. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE LEADER OF THE DELEGATION, MR JOMO NYAMBI For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”.Read more