Parliament, Wednesday, 24 October 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform today adopted the amendments to the Electronic Deeds Registration Systems Bill [B35-2017]. The Office of the Chief Registrar of Deeds embarked on a project for the implementation of e-commerce principles, in order to facilitate an Electronic Deeds Registration System (e-DRS). This will provide for, amongst other things, the registration of large volumes of deeds effectively; improved turn-around times for providing registered deeds and documents to clients; access to deeds registration services across the country; enhanced accuracy of examination and registration; availability of information to the public; and security features including confidentiality, non-repudiation, integrity and availability. The portfolio committee also adopted the report of the Electronic Deeds Registration System Bill [B35-2017]. The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Phumuzile Ngwenya-Mabila, said that this Bill is welcomed, as the registration of property will now be quicker and the public can track the system via the conveyancers to see progress on the registration of their property. However, the committee would like to see a system developed where people who hold informal land rights, such as Permission to Occupy, are able to have these rights recorded. The committee encouraged the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform to develop such a system. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM, MS PHUMUZILE NGWENYA-MABILA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer.
	
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee.Read more