Parliament, Wednesday, 03 October 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Police believes that tackling gang violence is not only a matter of law and order, but needs comprehensive strategic intervention from relevant government departments, civil society, non-governmental organisations, business, educational institutions, community leaders and religious institutions to address the underlying socio-economic causes in affected communities. This afternoon, the Chairperson of the committee, Mr Francois Beukman, met with community leaders of the United Front who participated in a march to Parliament to highlight crime in the Western Cape. Mr Beukman said that the Constitution is clear that the role of the police service is to prevent, combat and investigate crime, to maintain public order, protect and secure the inhabitants of the Republic, as well as uphold and enforce the law. He further said that the committee takes very seriously the concerns and complaints of the protesters about police service delivery. “When communities are under siege by criminals and their ability to function as citizens becomes impaired, extraordinary measures should be taken by law-enforcement agencies,” said Mr Beukman. On behalf of the committee, Mr Beukman has welcome the outreach by the Minister of Police to violence-stricken communities and the commitment to increase resources and specialised deployments to deal with communities’ immediate concerns. The committee believes that a long-term and sustainable action plan to deal with gang-related violence from a policing perspective should be underpinned by the following steps. Mr Beukman said that the committee will convene a special meeting focussing on the plight of communities in gang-infested areas and invite community representatives from four provinces to give input. The South African Police Service, the Civilian Police Secretariat and the Independent Police Investigative Directorate will also be invited to the meeting. The date for the meeting will be announced in the coming week. Mr Beukman emphasised that it is essential, from an oversight perspective, for Parliament to scrutinise the current strategies and plans to deal with gang and gun violence in communities to ensure that service delivery is improved. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact committee’s media officer: Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed.Read more