Parliament, Friday, 12 October 2018 – The Portfolio Committee on Police is of the view that police visibility in communities and effective community policing should be intensified.
	
	The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Mr Francois Beukman, was commenting following the release of the Victims of Crime Survey by Statistics South Africa (Stats SA). The survey shows that crime is on the increase, with an estimated 1.24 million households experiencing crime over the period.
	
	“The finding that housebreaking and burglary is the most prevalent crime affecting South Africans necessitates the Saps [South African Police Service] to intensify the visibility of police units throughout the country. Regular police patrols, more roadblocks in hotspot areas, efficient sector policing, increased cooperation with community patrollers and Community Police Forums, private security companies and neighbourhood watches is key in finding long-term solutions,” Mr Beukman said.
	
	Community policing must be underpinned by better response times from police units to crime reporting and crime incidents. Detection rates for various crime categories are still too low and the Detective Services division should ramp up their efforts to deal with current deficiencies.
	
	The portfolio committee is very concerned with the drop in public satisfaction with the police to 54.2 percent for the 2017/18 financial year.
	
	Mr Beukman said national police management should ensure that cluster and station commanders increase efforts to deal with priority and contact crimes in their respective jurisdictions. Tactical deployment and preventative operations of Saps members should focus on deterrence and building community trust.
	
	National police management indicated in Parliament this week that filling all vacant posts at stations will be prioritised.
	
	Furthermore, efforts to recruit more police reservists as a force multiplier is more important than ever before. It is essential that high crime spots are prioritised in the allocation of members, relevant equipment and vehicles.
	
	The Portfolio Committee on Police will invite Stats SA to brief the committee on the survey in a fortnight. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR FRANCOIS BEUKMAN For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs.Read more